<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
				<p>Pauline sat up suddenly in bed. It was as if an invisible hand had touched a spring in her spinal column, and set her upright in the darkness before she was aware of any reason for it.</p>
				<p>No doubt she had heard something through her sleep; but what? She listened for a repetition of the sound.</p>
				<p>All was silence. She stretched out her hand to an onyx knob on the table by her bed, and instantly the face of a miniature clock was illuminated, and the hour chimed softly; two strokes followed by one. Half-past two‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe silentest hour of the night; and in the vernal hush of Cedarledge! Yet certainly there had been a sound‚ÅÝ‚Äîa sharp explosive sound‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Again! There it was: a revolver shot‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ somewhere in the house‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>Burglars?</p>
				<p>Her feet were in her slippers, her hand on the electric light switch. All the while she continued to listen intently. Dead silence everywhere‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>But how had burglars got in without starting the alarm? Ah‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe remembered! Powder had orders never to set it while anyone was out of the house; it was Dexter who should have seen that it was connected when he got back from Greystock with Lita. And naturally he had forgotten to.</p>
				<p>Pauline was on her feet, her hair smoothed back under her fillet-shaped cap of silver lace, her ‚Äúrest-gown‚Äù of silvery silk slipped over her nightdress. This emergency garb always lay at her bedside in case of nocturnal alarms, and she was equipped in an instant, and had already reconnected the burglar-alarm, and sounded the general summons for Powder, the footmen, the gardeners and chauffeurs. Her hand played irresolutely over the complicated knobs of the glittering switchboard which filled a panel of her dressing-room; then she pressed the button marked ‚ÄúEngine-house.‚Äù Why not? There had been a series of bad suburban burglaries lately, and one never knew‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was just as well to rouse the neighbourhood‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Dexter was so careless. Very likely he had left the front door open.</p>
				<p>Silence still‚ÅÝ‚Äîprofounder than ever. Not a sound since that second shot, if shot it was. Very softly she opened her door and paused in the anteroom between her room and her husband‚Äôs. ‚ÄúDexter!‚Äù she called.</p>
				<p>No answer; no responding flash of light. Men slept so heavily. She opened, lighted‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDexter!‚Äù</p>
				<p>The room was empty, her husband‚Äôs bed unslept in. But then‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat? Those sounds of his return? Had she been dreaming when she thought she heard them? Or was it the burglars she had heard, looting his room, a few feet off from where she lay? In spite of her physical courage a shiver ran over her‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>But if Dexter and Lita were not yet back, whence had the sound of the shot come, and who had fired it? She trembled at the thought of Nona‚ÅÝ‚ÄîNona and the baby! They were alone with the baby‚Äôs nurse on the farther side of the house. And the house seemed suddenly so immense, so resonant, so empty‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>In the shadowy corridor outside her room she paused again for a second, straining her ears for a guiding sound; then she sped on, pushing back the swinging door which divided the farther wing from hers, turning on the lights with a flying hand as she ran‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ On the deeply carpeted floors her footfall made no sound, and she had the sense of skimming over the ground inaudibly, like something ghostly, disembodied, which had no power to break the hush and make itself heard‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>Halfway down the passage she was startled to see the door of Lita‚Äôs bedroom open. Sounds at last‚ÅÝ‚Äîsounds low, confused and terrified‚ÅÝ‚Äîissued from it. What kind of sounds? Pauline could not tell; they were rushing together in a vortex in her brain. She heard herself scream ‚ÄúHelp!‚Äù with the strangled voice of a nightmare, and was comforted to feel the rush of other feet behind her: Powder, the menservants, the maids. Thank God the system worked! Whatever she was coming to, at least they would be there to help‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>She reached the door, pushed it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand it unexpectedly resisted. Someone was clinging to it on the inner side, struggling to hold it shut, to prevent her entering. She threw herself against it with all her strength, and saw her husband‚Äôs arm and hand in the gap. ‚ÄúDexter!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, God.‚Äù He fell back, and the door with him. Pauline went in.</p>
				<p>All the lights were on‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe room was a glare. Another man stood shivering and staring in a corner, but Pauline hardly noticed him, for before her on the floor lay Lita‚Äôs long body, in a loose spangled robe, flung sobbing over another body.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNona‚ÅÝ‚ÄîNona!‚Äù the mother screamed, rushing forward to where they lay.</p>
				<p>She swept past her husband, dragged Lita back, was on her knees on the floor, her child pressed to her, Nona‚Äôs fallen head against her breast, Nona‚Äôs blood spattering the silvery folds of the rest-gown, destroying it forever as a symbol of safety and repose.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNona‚ÅÝ‚Äîchild! What‚Äôs happened? Are you hurt? Dexter‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor pity‚Äôs sake! Nona, look at me! It‚Äôs mother, darling, mother‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Nona‚Äôs eyes opened with a flutter. Her face was ashen-white, and empty as a baby‚Äôs. Slowly she met her mother‚Äôs agonized stare. ‚ÄúAll right‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ only winged me.‚Äù Her gaze wavered about the disordered room, lifting and dropping in a butterfly‚Äôs bewildered flight. Lita lay huddled on the couch in her spangles, twisted and emptied, like a festal garment flung off by its wearer. Manford stood between, his face a ruin. In the corner stood that other man, shrinking, motionless. Pauline‚Äôs eyes, following her child‚Äôs, travelled on to him.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúArthur!‚Äù she gasped out, and felt Nona‚Äôs feeble pressure on her arm.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ don‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was an accident. Father‚ÅÝ‚Äîan accident! <em>Father</em>!‚Äù</p>
				<p>The door of the room was wide now, and Powder stood there, unnaturally thin and gaunt in his improvised collarless garb, marshalling the gaping footmen, with gardeners, chauffeurs and maids crowding the corridor behind them. It was really marvellous, how Pauline‚Äôs system had worked.</p>
				<p>Manford turned to Arthur Wyant, his stony face white with revenge. Wyant still stood motionless, his arms hanging down, his body emptied of all its strength, a broken word that sounded like ‚Äúhonour‚Äù stumbling from his bedraggled lips.</p>
				<p>‚Äú<em>Father</em>!‚Äù At Nona‚Äôs faint cry Manford‚Äôs arm fell to his side also, and he stood there as powerless and motionless as the other.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAll an accident‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù breathed from the white lips against Pauline.</p>
				<p>Powder had stepped forward. His staccato orders rang back over his shoulder. ‚ÄúRing up the doctor. Have a car ready. Scour the gardens‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ One of the women here! Madam‚Äôs maid!‚Äù</p>
				<p>Manford suddenly roused himself and swung about with dazed eyes on the disheveled group in the doorway. ‚ÄúDamn you, what are you doing here, all of you? Get out‚ÅÝ‚Äîget out, the lot of you! Get out, I say! Can‚Äôt you hear me?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Powder bent a respectful but controlling eye on his employer. ‚ÄúYes, sir; certainly, sir. I only wish to state that the burglar‚Äôs mode of entrance has already been discovered.‚Äù Manford met this with an unseeing stare, but the butler continued imperturbably: ‚ÄúThanks to the rain, sir. He got in through the pantry window; the latch was forced, and there‚Äôs muddy footprints on my linoleum, sir. A tramp was noticed hanging about this afternoon. I can give evidence‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>He darted swiftly between the two men, bent to the floor, and picked up something which he slipped quickly and secretly into his pocket. A moment later he had cleared his underlings from the threshold, and the door was shut on them and him.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDexter,‚Äù Pauline cried, ‚Äúhelp me to lift her to the bed.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Outside, through the watchful hush of the night, a rattle and roar came up the drive. It filled the silence with an unnatural clamour, immense, mysterious and menacing. It was the Cedarledge fire-brigade, arriving double quick in answer to their benefactress‚Äôs summons.</p>
				<p>Pauline, bending over her daughter‚Äôs face, fancied she caught a wan smile on it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
