<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2><a id="chap23"/>XXIII</h2>
				<p>DECIDEDLY, there was a different time-measure for life in town and in the country.</p>
				<p>The dinner for Amalasuntha organized (and the Toys secured for it), there were still two days left in that endless inside of a week which was to have passed so rapidly. Yet everything had gone according to Pauline’s wishes. Dexter had really made the promised round of house and grounds, and had extended his inspection to dairy, poultry yard and engine-house. And he had approved of everything⁠—approved almost too promptly and uncritically. Was it because he had not been sufficiently interested to note defects, or at any rate to point them out? The suspicion, which stirred in his wife when she observed that he walked through the cow-stables without making any comment on the defective working of the new ventilating system, became a certainty when, on their return to the house, she suggested their going over the accounts together. “Oh, as long as the architect has o.k’d them! Besides, it’s too late now to do anything, isn’t it? And your results are so splendid that I don’t see how they could be overpaid. Everything seems to be perfect⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Not the ventilating system in the Alderneys’ stable, Dexter.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, well; can’t that be arranged? If it can’t, put it down to profit and loss. I never enjoyed anything more than my swim this morning in the pool. You’ve managed to get the water warmed to exactly the right temperature.”</p>
				<p>He slipped out to join Nona on the putting green below the terrace.</p>
				<p>Yes; everything was all right; he was evidently determined that everything should be. It had been the same about Michelangelo’s debts. At first he had resisted his wife’s suggestion that they should help to pay them off, in order to escape the young man’s presence in New York; then he had suddenly promised the Marchesa to settle the whole amount, without so much as a word to Pauline. It was as if he were engrossed in some deep and secret purpose, and resolved to clear away whatever threatened to block his obstinate advance. She had seen him thus absorbed when a “big case” possessed him. But there were no signs now of professional preoccupation; no telephoning, wiring, hurried arrivals of junior members or confidential clerks. He seemed to have shaken off “the office” with all his other cares. There was something about his serene good humour that obscurely frightened her.</p>
				<p>Once she might have ascribed it to an interest⁠—an exaggerated interest⁠—in his step-son’s wife. That idea had already crossed Pauline’s mind: she remembered its cold brush on the evening when her husband had come home unexpectedly to see her, and had talked so earnestly and sensibly about bringing Lita and her boy to Cedarledge. The mere flit of a doubt⁠—no more; and even then Pauline had felt its preposterousness, and banished it in disgust and fear.</p>
				<p>Now she smiled at the fear. Her husband’s manner to Lita was perfect⁠—easy, good humoured but slightly ironic. At the time of Jim’s marriage Dexter had had that same smile. He had thought the bride silly and pretentious, he had even questioned her good looks. And now the first week at Cedarledge showed that, if his attitude had grown kindlier, it was for Jim’s sake, not Lita’s. Nona and Lita were together all day long; when Manford joined them he treated both in the same way, as a man treats two indulged and amusing daughters.</p>
				<p>What was he thinking of, then? Gladys Toy again, perhaps? Pauline had imagined that was over. Even if it were not, it no longer worried her. Dexter had had similar “flare-ups” before, and they hadn’t lasted. Besides, Pauline had gradually acquired a certain wifely philosophy, and was prepared to be more lenient to her second husband than to the first. As wives grew older they had to realize that husbands didn’t always keep pace with them⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Not that she felt herself too old for Manford’s love; all her early illusions had rushed back to her the night he had made her give up the Rivington dinner. But her dream had not survived that evening. She had understood then that he meant they should be “only friends”; that was all the future was to hold for her. Well; for a grandmother it ought to be enough. She had no patience with the silly old women who expected “that sort of nonsense” to last. Still, she meant, on her return to town, to consult a new Russian who had invented a radium treatment which absolutely wiped out wrinkles. He called himself a Scientific Initiate⁠ ⁠… the name fascinated her.</p>
				<p>From these perplexities she was luckily distracted by the urgent business of the Cardinal’s reception. Even without Maisie she could do a good deal of preparatory writing and telephoning; but she was mortified to find how much her handwriting had suffered from the long habit of dictation. She never wrote a note in her own hand nowadays⁠—except to distinguished foreigners, since Amalasuntha had explained that they thought typed communications ill-bred. And her unpractised script was so stiff and yet slovenly that she decided she must have her hands “treated” as she did her other unemployed muscles. But how find time for this new and indispensable cure? Her spirits rose with the invigorating sense of being once more in a hurry⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Nona sat on the south terrace in the sun. The Cedarledge experiment had lasted eight days now, and she had to own that it had turned out better than she would have thought possible.</p>
				<p>Lita was giving them wonderfully little trouble. After the first flight to Greenwich she had shown no desire for cabarets and night-clubs, but had plunged into the alternative excitement of violent outdoor sports; relapsing, after hours of hard exercise, into a dreamy lassitude unruffled by outward events. She never spoke of her husband, and Nona did not know if Jim’s frequent⁠—too frequent⁠—letters, were answered, or even read. Lita smiled vaguely when he was mentioned, and merely remarked, when her mother-in-law once risked an allusion to the future: “I thought we were here to be cured of plans.” And Pauline effaced her blunder with a smile.</p>
				<p>Nona herself felt more and more like one of the trench-watchers pictured in the war-time papers. There she sat in the darkness on her narrow perch, her eyes glued to the observation-slit which looked out over seeming emptiness. She had often wondered what those men thought about during the endless hours of watching, the days and weeks when nothing happened, when no faintest shadow of a skulking enemy crossed their span of no-man’s land. What kept them from falling asleep, or from losing themselves in waking dreams, and failing to give warning when the attack impended? She could imagine a man led out to be shot in the Flanders mud because, at such a moment, he had believed himself to be dozing on a daisy bank at home⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Since her talk with Aggie Heuston a sort of <i>curare</i> had entered into her veins. She was sharply aware of everything that was going on about her, but she felt unable to rouse herself. Even if anything that mattered ever did happen again, she questioned if she would be able to shake off the weight of her indifference. Was it really ten days now since that talk with Aggie? And had everything of which she had then been warned fulfilled itself without her lifting a finger? She dimly remembered having acted in what seemed a mood of heroic self-denial; now she felt only as if she had been numb. What was the use of fine motives if, once the ardour fallen, even they left one in the lurch?</p>
				<p>She thought: “I feel like the oldest person in the world, and yet with the longest life ahead of me⁠ ⁠…” and a shiver of loneliness ran over her.</p>
				<p>Should she go and hunt up the others? What difference would that make? She might offer to write notes for her mother, who was upstairs plunged in her visiting-list; or look in on Lita, who was probably asleep after her hard gallop of the morning; or find her father, and suggest going for a walk. She had not seen her father since lunch; but she seemed to remember that he had ordered his new Buick brought round. Off again⁠—he was as restless as the others. All of them were restless nowadays. Had he taken Lita with him, perhaps? Well⁠—why not? Wasn’t he here to look after Lita? A sudden twitch of curiosity drew Nona to her feet, and sent her slowly upstairs to her sister-in-law’s room. Why did she have to drag one foot after the other, as if some hidden influence held her back, signalled a mute warning not to go? What nonsense! Better make a clean breast of it to herself once for all, and admit⁠—</p>
				<p>“I beg pardon, Miss.” It was the ubiquitous Powder at her heels. “If you’re going up to Mrs. Manford’s sitting-room would you kindly tell her that Mr. Manford has telephoned he won’t be back from Greystock till late, and she’s please not to wait dinner?” Powder looked a little as if he would rather not give that particular message himself.</p>
				<p>“Greystock? Oh, all right. I’ll tell her.”</p>
				<p>Golf again⁠—golf and Gladys Toy. Nona gave her clinging preoccupations a last shake. This was really a lesson to her! To be imagining horrible morbid things about her father while he was engaged in a perfectly normal elderly man’s flirtation with a stupid woman he would forget as soon as he got back to town! A real Easter holiday diversion. “After all, he gave up his tarpon-fishing to come here, and Gladys isn’t a bad substitute⁠—as far as weight goes. But a good deal less exciting as sport.” A dreary gleam of amusement crossed her mind.</p>
				<p>Softly she pushed open the door of one of the perfectly appointed spare-rooms: a room so studiously equipped with every practical convenience⁠—from the smoothly-hung window-ventilators to the jointed dressing-table lights, from the little portable telephone, and the bed-table with folding legs, to the tall threefold mirror which lost no curve of the beauty it reflected⁠—that even Lita’s careless ways seemed subdued to the prevailing order.</p>
				<p>Lita was on the lounge, one long arm drooping, the other folded behind her in the immemorial attitude of sleeping beauty. Sleep lay on her lightly, as it does on those who summon it at will. It was her habitual escape from the boredom between thrills, and in such intervals of existence as she was now traversing she plunged back into it after every bout of outdoor activity.</p>
				<p>Nona tiptoed forward and looked down on her. Who said that sleep revealed people’s true natures? It only made them the more enigmatic by the added veil of its own mystery. Lita’s head was nested in the angle of a thin arm, her lids rounded heavily above the sharp cheek-bones just swept by their golden fringe, the pale bow of the mouth relaxed, the slight steel-strong body half shown in the parting of a flowered dressing-gown. Thus exposed, with gaze extinct and loosened muscles, she seemed a mere bundle of contradictory whims tied together by a frail thread of beauty. The hand of the downward arm hung open, palm up. In its little hollow lay the fate of three lives. What would she do with them? How could one conceive of her knowing, or planning, or imagining⁠—conceive of her in any sort of durable human relations to any one or anything?</p>
				<p>Her eyes opened and a languid curiosity floated up through them.</p>
				<p>“That you? I must have fallen asleep. I was trying to count up the number of months we’ve been here, and numbers always make me go to sleep.”</p>
				<p>Nona laughed and sat down at the foot of the lounge. “Dear me⁠—just as I thought you were beginning to be happy!”</p>
				<p>“Well, isn’t this what you call being happy⁠—in the country?”</p>
				<p>“Lying on your back, and wondering how many months there are in a week?”</p>
				<p>“A week? Is it only a week? How on earth can you be sure, when one day’s so exactly like another?”</p>
				<p>“Tomorrow won’t be. There’s the blow-out for Amalasuntha, and dancing afterward. Mother’s idea of the simple life.”</p>
				<p>“Well, all your mother’s ideas <i>are</i> simple.” Lita yawned, her pale pink mouth drooping like a faded flower. “Besides, it’s ages till tomorrow. Where’s your father? He was going to take me for a spin in the new Buick.”</p>
				<p>“He’s broken his promise, then. Deserted us all and sneaked off to Greystock on his lone.”</p>
				<p>A faint redness rose to Lita’s cheek-bones. “Greystock and Gladys Toy? Is that <i>his</i> idea of the simple life? About on a par with your mother’s⁠ ⁠… Did you ever notice the Toy ankles?”</p>
				<p>Nona smiled. “They’re not unnoticeable. But you forget that father’s getting to be an old gentleman⁠ ⁠… Fathers mustn’t be choosers⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Lita made a slight grimace. “Oh, he could do better than that. There’s old Cosby, who looks heaps older⁠—didn’t he want to marry you?⁠ ⁠… Nona, you darling, let’s take the Ford and run over to Greenwich for dinner. Would your mother so very much mind? Does she want us here the whole blessed time?”</p>
				<p>“I’ll go and ask her. But on a Friday night the Country Club will be as dead as the moon. Only a few old ladies playing bridge.”</p>
				<p>“Well, then we’ll have the floor to ourselves. I want a good practice, and it’s a ripping floor. We can dance with the waiters. It’ll be fun to shock the old ladies. I noticed one of the waiters the other day⁠—must be an Italian⁠—built rather like Tommy Ardwin⁠ ⁠… I’m sure he dances⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>That was all life meant to Lita⁠—would ever mean. Good floors to practise new dance-steps on, men⁠—any men⁠—to dance with and be flattered by, women⁠—any women⁠—to stare and envy one, dull people to startle, stupid people to shock⁠—but never any one, Nona questioned, whom one wanted neither to startle nor shock, neither to be envied nor flattered by, but just to lose one’s self in for good and all? Lita lose herself⁠—? Why, all she wanted was to keep on finding herself, immeasurably magnified, in every pair of eyes she met!</p>
				<p>And here were Nona and her father and mother fighting to preserve this brittle plaything for Jim, when somewhere in the world there might be a real human woman for him⁠ ⁠… What was the sense of it all?</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
