<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2><a id="chap27"/>XXVII</h2>
				<p>THE restorative effect of a day away from the country was visible in Pauline’s face and manner when she dawned on the breakfast-table the next morning. The mere tone in which she murmured: “How lovely it is to get back!” showed how lovely it had been to get away⁠—and she lingered over the new-laid eggs, the golden cream, all the country freshnesses and succulences, with the sense of having richly earned them by a long day spent in arduous and agreeable labours.</p>
				<p>“When there are tiresome things to be done the great thing is to do them at once,” she announced to Nona across the whole-wheat toast and scrambled eggs. “I simply hated to leave all this loveliness yesterday; but how much more I’m going to enjoy it today because I did!”</p>
				<p>Her day in town had in truth been exceptionally satisfactory. All had gone well, from her encounter, at Amalasuntha’s, with one of the Cardinal’s secretaries, to the belated glimpse of Maisie Bruss, haggard but hopeful on the hospital steps, receiving the hamper of fruit and flowers with grateful exclamations, and assurances that the surgeon was “perfectly satisfied,” and that there was “no reason why the dreadful thing should ever reappear.” In a wave of sympathetic emotion Pauline had leaned from the motor to kiss her and say: “Your mother must have a good rest at Atlantic City as soon as she can be moved⁠—I’ll arrange it. Sea air is such a tonic⁠ ⁠…” and Maisie had thanked and wept again⁠ ⁠… It was pleasant to be able, in a few words, to make any one so happy⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>She had found Mrs. Swoffer too; found her in a super-terrestrial mood, beaming through inspired eye-glasses, and pouring out new torrents of stimulation.</p>
				<p>Yes: Alvah Loft was a great man, Mrs. Swoffer said. She, for her part, had never denied it for a moment. How could Pauline have imagined that her faith in Alvah Loft had failed her? No⁠—but there were periods of spiritual aridity which the brightest souls had to traverse, and she had lately had reason to suspect, from her own experience and from Pauline’s, that perhaps Alvah Loft was at present engaged in such a desert. Certainly to charge a hundred dollars for a “triple treatment” (which was only three minutes longer than the plain one), and then produce no more lasting results⁠—well, Mrs. Swoffer preferred not to say anything uncharitable⁠ ⁠… Then again, she sometimes suspected that Alvah Loft’s doctrine might be only for beginners. That was what Sacha Gobine, the new Russian Initiate, plainly intimated. Of course there were innumerable degrees in the spiritual life, and it might be that sometimes Alvah Loft’s patients got beyond his level⁠—got above it⁠—without his being aware of the fact. Frankly, that was what Gobine thought (from Mrs. Swoffer’s report) must have happened in the case of Pauline. “I believe your friend has reached a higher plane”⁠—that was the way the Initiate put it. “She’s been at the gate” (he called the Mahatma and Alvah Loft “gatekeepers”), “and now the gate has opened, and she has entered in⁠—entered into⁠ ⁠…” But Mrs. Swoffer said she’d rather not try to quote him because she couldn’t put it as beautifully as he did, and she wanted Pauline to hear it in his own mystical language. “It’s eternal rejuvenation just to sit and listen to him,” she breathed, laying an electric touch on her visitor’s hand.</p>
				<p>Rejuvenation! The word dashed itself like cool spray against Pauline’s strained nerves and parched complexion. She could never hear it without longing to plunge deep into its healing waters. Between manicure and hair-waver she was determined to squeeze in a moment with Gobine.</p>
				<p>And the encounter, as she told Nona, had been like “a religious experience”⁠—apparently forgetful of the fact that every other meeting with a new prophet had presented itself to her in identical terms.</p>
				<p>“You see, my dear, it’s something so entirely new, so completely different⁠ ⁠… so emotional; yes, emotional; that’s the word. The Russians, of course, are emotional; it’s their peculiar quality. Alvah Loft⁠—and you understand that I don’t in the least suggest any loss of faith in him; but Alvah Loft has a mind which speaks to the <i>mind</i>; there is no appeal to the feelings. Whereas in Gobine’s teaching there is a mystic strain, a kind of Immediacy, as Mrs. Swoffer calls it⁠ ⁠… Immediacy⁠ ⁠…” Pauline lingered on the term. It captivated her, as any word did when she first heard it used in a new connection. “I don’t know how one could define the sensation better. ‘Soul-unveiling’ is Gobine’s expression⁠ ⁠… But he insists on time, on plenty of time⁠ ⁠… He says we are all parching our souls by too much hurry. Of course I always felt that with Alvah Loft. I felt like one of those cash-boxes they shoot along over your head in the department stores. Number one, number two, and so on⁠—always somebody treading on your heels. Whereas Gobine absolutely refuses to be hurried. Sometimes he sees only one patient a day. When I left him he told me he thought he would not see any one else till the next morning. ‘I don’t want to mingle your soul with any other.’ Rather beautiful, wasn’t it? And he does give one a wonderful dreamy sense of rest⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>She closed her eyes and leaned back, evoking the gaunt bearded face and heavy-lidded eyes of the new prophet, and the moist adhesive palm he had laid in benediction on her forehead. How different from the thick-lipped oily Mahatma, and from the thin dry Alvah Loft, who seemed more like an implement in a laboratory than a human being! “Perhaps one needs them all in turn,” Pauline murmured half-aloud, with the self-indulgence of the woman who has never had to do over an out-of-fashion garment.</p>
				<p>“One ought to be able to pass on last year’s healers to one’s poor relations, oughtn’t one, mother?” Nona softly mocked; but her mother disarmed her with an unresentful smile.</p>
				<p>“Darling! I know you don’t understand these things yet⁠—only, child, I do want you to be a little on your guard against becoming bitter, won’t you? There⁠—you don’t mind your old mother’s just suggesting it?”</p>
				<p>Really Nona worried her at times⁠—or would, if Gobine hadn’t shed over her this perfumed veil of Peace. Yes⁠—Peace: that was what she had always needed. Perfect confidence that everything would always come right in the end. Of course the other healers had taught that too; some people might say that Gobine’s evangel was only the Mahatma’s doctrine of the Higher Harmony. But the resemblance was merely superficial, as the Scientific Initiate had been careful to explain to her. Her previous guides had not been Initiates, and had no scientific training; they could only guess, whereas he <i>knew</i>. That was the meaning of Immediacy: direct contact with the Soul of the Invisible. How clear and beautiful he made it all! How all the little daily problems shrivelled up and vanished like a puff of smoke to eyes cleared by that initiation! And he had seen at once that Pauline was one of the few who <i>could</i> be initiated; who were worthy to be drawn out of the senseless modern rush and taken in Beyond the Veil. She closed her eyes again, and felt herself there with him⁠ ⁠… “Of course he treats hardly anybody,” Mrs. Swoffer had assured her; “not one in a hundred. He says he’d rather starve than waste his time on the unmystical. (He saw at once that you were mystical.) Because he takes time⁠—he must have it⁠ ⁠… Days, weeks, if necessary. Our crowded engagements mean nothing to him. He won’t have a clock in the house. And he doesn’t care whether he’s paid or not; he says he’s paid in soul-growth. Marvellous, isn’t it?”</p>
				<p>Marvellous indeed! And how different from Alvah Loft’s Taylorized treatments, his rapidly rising scale of charges, and the unbroken stream of patients succeeding each other under his bony touch! And how one came back from communion with the Invisible longing to help others, to draw all one’s dear ones with one Beyond the Veil. Pauline had gone to town with an unavowed burden on her mind. Jim, Lita, her husband, that blundering Amalasuntha, that everlasting Michelangelo; and Nona, too⁠—Nona, who looked thinner and more drawn every day, and whose tongue seemed to grow sharper and more derisive; who seemed⁠—at barely twenty⁠—to be turning from a gay mocking girl into a pinched fault-finding old maid⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>All these things had weighed on Pauline more than she cared to acknowledge; but now she felt strong enough to lift them, or rather they had become as light as air. “If only you Americans would persuade yourselves of the utter unimportance of the Actual⁠—of the total non-existence of the Real.” That was what Gobine had said, and the words had thrilled her like a revelation. Her eyes continued to rest with an absent smile on her daughter’s ironic face, but what she was really thinking of was: “How on earth can I possibly induce him to come to the Cardinal’s reception?”</p>
				<p>That was one of the things that Nona would never understand her caring about. She would credit⁠—didn’t Pauline know!⁠—her mother with the fatuous ambition to use her united celebrities for a social “draw,” as a selfish child might gather all its toys into one heap; she would never see how important it was to bring together the representatives of the conflicting creeds, the bearers of the multiple messages, in the hope of drawing from their contact the flash of revelation for which the whole creation groaned. “If only the Cardinal could have a quiet talk with Gobine,” Pauline thought; and, immediately dramatizing the possibility, saw herself steering his Eminence toward the innermost recess of her long suite of drawing-rooms, where the Scientific Initiate, shaggy but inspired, would suddenly stand before the Prince of the Church while she guarded the threshold from intruders. What new life it might put into the ossified Roman dogmas if the Cardinal could be made to understand that beautiful new doctrine of Immediacy! But how could she ever persuade Gobine to kiss the ring?</p>
				<p>“And Mrs. Bruss⁠—any news? I thought Maisie seemed really hopeful.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; the night wasn’t bad. The doctors think she’ll go on all right⁠—for the present.”</p>
				<p>Pauline frowned; it was distasteful to have the suggestion of suffering and decay obtruded upon her beatific mood. She was living in a world where such things were not, and it seemed cruel⁠—and unnecessary⁠—to suggest to her that perhaps all Mrs. Bruss had already endured might not avail to spare her future misery.</p>
				<p>“I’m sure we ought to try to resist looking ahead, and creating imaginary suffering for ourselves or others. Why should the doctors say ‘for the present’? They can’t possibly tell if the disease will ever come back.”</p>
				<p>“No; but they know it generally does.”</p>
				<p>“Can’t you see, Nona, that that’s just what <i>makes</i> it? Being prepared to suffer is really the way to create suffering. And creating suffering is creating sin, because sin and suffering are really one. We ought to refuse ourselves to pain. All the great Healers have taught us that.”</p>
				<p>Nona lifted her eyebrows in the slightly disturbing way she had. “Did Christ?”</p>
				<p>Pauline felt her colour rise. This habit of irrelevant and rather impertinent retort was growing on Nona. The idea of stirring up the troublesome mysteries of Christian dogma at the breakfast-table! Pauline had no intention of attacking any religion. But Nona was really getting as querulous as a teething child. Perhaps that was what she was, morally; perhaps some new experience was forcing its way through the tender flesh of her soul. The suggestion was disturbing to all Pauline’s theories; yet confronted with her daughter’s face and voice she could only take refuge in the idea that Nona, unable to attain the Higher Harmony, was struggling in a crepuscular wretchedness from which she refused to be freed.</p>
				<p>“If you’d only come to Gobine with me, dear, these problems would never trouble you any more.”</p>
				<p>“They don’t now⁠—not an atom. What troubles me is the plain human tangle, as it remains after we’ve done our best to straighten it out. Look at Mrs. Bruss!”</p>
				<p>“But the doctors say there’s every chance⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Did you ever know them not to, after a first operation for cancer?”</p>
				<p>“Of course, Nona, if you take sorrow and suffering for granted⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I don’t, mother; but, apparently, Somebody does, judging from their diffusion and persistency, as the natural history books say.”</p>
				<p>Pauline felt her smooth brows gather in an unwelcome frown. The child had succeeded in spoiling her breakfast and in unsettling the happy equilibrium which she had imparted to her world. She didn’t know what ailed Nona, unless she was fretting over Stan Heuston’s disgraceful behaviour; but if so, it was better that she should learn in time what he was, and face her disillusionment. She might actually have ended by falling in love with him, Pauline reflected, and that would have been very disagreeable on account of Aggie. “What she needs is to marry,” Pauline said to herself, struggling back to serenity.</p>
				<p>She glanced at her watch, wondered if it were worth while to wait any longer for her husband, and decided to instruct Powder to keep his breakfast hot, and produce fresh coffee and rice-cakes when he rang.</p>
				<p>Dexter, the day before, had taken Lita off on another long excursion. They had turned up so late that dinner had to be postponed for them, and had been so silent and remote all the evening that Pauline had ventured a jest on the soporific effects of country air, and suggested that every one should go to bed early. This morning, though it was past ten o’clock, neither of the two had appeared; and Nona declared herself ignorant of their plans for the day.</p>
				<p>“It’s a mercy Lita is so satisfied here,” Pauline sighed, resigning herself to another dull day at the thought of the miracle Manford was accomplishing. She had felt rather nervous when Amalasuntha had appeared with her incredible film stories, and her braggings about the irresistible Michelangelo; but Lita did not seem to have been unsettled by them.</p>
				<p>“Jim will have a good deal to be grateful for when he gets home,” Pauline smiled to her daughter. “I do hope he’ll appreciate what your father has done. His staying on the island seems to show that he does. By the way,” she added, with another smile, “I didn’t tell you, did I, that I ran across Arthur yesterday?”</p>
				<p>Nona hesitated a moment. “So did I.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, did you? He didn’t mention it. He looks better, don’t you think so? But I found him excited and restless⁠—almost as if another attack of gout were coming on. He was annoyed because I wouldn’t go and see him then and there, though it was after six, and I should have had to dine in town.”</p>
				<p>“It’s just as well you didn’t, after such a tiring day.”</p>
				<p>“He was so persistent⁠—you know how he is at times. He insisted that he must have a talk with me, though he wouldn’t tell me about what.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t believe he knows. As you say, he’s always nervous when he has an attack coming on.”</p>
				<p>“But he seemed so hurt at my refusing. He wanted me to promise to go back today. And when I told him I couldn’t he said that if I didn’t he’d come out here.”</p>
				<p>Nona gave an impatient shrug. “How absurd! But of course he won’t. I don’t exactly see dear old Exhibit walking up to the front door of Cedarledge.”</p>
				<p>Pauline’s colour rose again; she too had pictured the same possibility, only to reject it. Wyant had always refused to cross her threshold in New York, though she lived in a house bought after her second marriage; surely he would be still more reluctant to enter Cedarledge, where he and she had spent their early life together, and their son had been born. There were certain things, as he was always saying, that a man didn’t do: that was all.</p>
				<p>Nona was still pondering. “I wouldn’t go to town to see him, mother; why should you? He was excited, and rather cross, yesterday, but he really hadn’t anything to say. He just wanted to hear himself talk. As long as we’re here he’ll never come, and when this mood passes off he won’t even remember what it was about. If you like I’ll write and tell him that you’ll see him as soon as we get back.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you, dear. I wish you would.”</p>
				<p>How sensible the child could be when she chose! Her answer chimed exactly with her mother’s secret inclination, and the latter, rising from the breakfast-table, decided to slip away to a final revision of the Cardinal’s list. It was pleasant, for once, to have time to give so important a matter all the attention it deserved.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
