<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap15"></a>XV</h2>


<p>
MANFORD, the day after his daughter had caught sight of him at the
Housetop, started out early for one of his long tramps around the Park.
He was not due at his office till ten, and he wanted first to walk
himself tired.
</p>
<p>
For some years after his marriage he had kept a horse in town, and taken
his morning constitutional in the saddle; but the daily canter over the
same bridle paths was too much like the circuit of his wife's
flower-garden. He took to his feet to make it last longer, and when
there was no time to walk had in a <i>masseur</i> who prepared him, in
the same way as everybody else, for the long hours of sedentary hurry
known as "business." The New York routine had closed in on him, and he
sometimes felt that, for intrinsic interest, there was little to choose
between Pauline's hurry and his own. They seemed, all of
them—lawyers, bankers, brokers, railway-directors and the
rest—to be cheating their inner emptiness with activities as
futile as those of the women they went home to.
</p>
<p>
It was all wrong—something about it was fundamentally wrong. They all
had these colossal plans for acquiring power, and then, when it was
acquired, what came of it but bigger houses, more food, more motors,
more pearls, and a more self-righteous philanthropy?
</p>
<p>
The philanthropy was what he most hated: all these expensive plans for
moral forcible feeding, for compelling everybody to be cleaner,
stronger, healthier and happier than they would have been by the unaided
light of Nature. The longing to get away into a world where men and
women sinned and begot, lived and died, as they chose, without the
perpetual intervention of optimistic millionaires, had become so strong
that he sometimes felt the chain of habit would snap with his first
jerk.
</p>
<p>
That was what had secretly drawn him to Jim's wife. She was the one
person in his group to whom its catchwords meant absolutely nothing. The
others, whatever their private omissions or indulgences, dressed up
their selfish cravings in the same wordy altruism. It used to be one's
duty to one's neighbour; now it had become one's duty to one's self.
Duty, duty—always duty! But when you spoke of duty to Lita she
just widened her eyes and said: "Is that out of the Marriage Service?
'Love, honour and obey'—such a funny combination! Who do you
suppose invented it? I believe it must have been Pauline." One could
never fix her attention on any subject beyond her own immediate
satisfaction, and that animal sincerity seemed to Manford her greatest
charm. Too great a charm ... a terrible danger. He saw it now. He
thought he had gone to her for relaxation, change—and he had just
managed to pull himself up on the edge of a precipice. But for the
sickening scene of the other evening, when he had shown her the
photograph, he might, old fool that he was, have let himself slip into
sentiment; and God knows where that tumble would have landed him. Now a
passionate pity had replaced his fatuous emotion, the baleful siren was
only a misguided child, and he was to help and save her for Jim's sake
and her own.
</p>
<p>
It was queer that such a mood of calm lucidity had come out of the fury
of hate with which he rushed from her house. If it had not, he would
have gone mad—smashed something, done something irretrievable. And
instead here he was, calmly contemplating his own folly and hers! He
must go on seeing her, of course; there was more reason than ever for
seeing her; but there would be no danger in it now, only help for
her—and perhaps healing for him. To this new mood he clung as to an
inviolable refuge. The turmoil and torment of the last months could
never reach him again: he had found a way out, an escape. The relief of
being quiet, of avoiding a conflict, of settling everything without
effusion of blood, stole over him like the spell of the drug-taker's
syringe. Poor little Lita ... never again to be adored (thank heaven),
but, oh, so much the more to be helped and pitied...
</p>
<p>
This deceptive serenity had come to him during his call on Mrs.
Landish—come from her very insensibility to any of the standards
he lived by. He had gone there—he saw it now—moved by the
cruel masculine desire to know the worst about a fallen idol. What he
called the determination to "face things"—what was it but the
savage longing to accumulate all the evidence against poor Lita? Give up
the Mahatma investigation? Never! All the more reason now for going on
with it; for exposing the whole blackguardly business, opening poor
Jim's eyes to his wife's past (better now than later), and helping him
to get on his feet again, start fresh, and recover his faith in life and
happiness. For of course poor Jim would be the chief sufferer... Damn
the woman! She wanted to get rid of Jim, did she? Well, here was her
chance—only it would be the other way round. The tables would be
turned on her. She'd see—! This in his first blind outbreak of
rage; but by the time he reached Mrs. Landish's door the old legal
shrewdness had come to his rescue, and he had understood that a public
scandal was unnecessary, and therefore to be avoided. Easy enough to get
rid of Lita without that. With such evidence as he would soon possess
they could make any conditions they chose. Jim would keep the boy, and
the whole thing be settled quietly—but on their terms, not hers!
She would be only too thankful to clear out bag and baggage—clean
out of all their lives. Faugh—to think he had delegated his own
Nona to look after her ... the thought sickened him.
</p>
<p>
And then, in the end, it had all come out so differently. He needed his
hard tramp around the Park to see just why.
</p>
<p>
It was Mrs. Landish's own attitude—her silly rambling
irresponsibility, so like an elderly parody of Lita's youthful
carelessness. Mrs. Landish had met Manford's stern interrogations by the
vague reply that he mustn't ever come to <i>her</i> for dates and
figures and statistics: that facts meant nothing to her, that the only
thing she cared for was Inspiration, Genius, the Divine Fire, or
whatever he chose to call it. Perhaps she'd done wrong, but she had
sacrificed everything, all her life, to her worship of genius. She was
always hunting for it everywhere, and it was because, from the first,
she had felt a touch of it in Lita that she had been so devoted to the
child. Didn't Manford feel it in Lita too? Of course she, Mrs. Landish,
had dreamed of another sort of marriage for her niece ... Oh, but
Manford mustn't misunderstand! Jim was perfect—<i>too</i> perfect.
That was the trouble. Manford surely guessed the meaning of that "too"?
Such absolute reliability, such complete devotion, were sometimes more
of a strain to the artistic temperament than scenes and infidelities.
And Lita was first and foremost an artist, born to live in the world of
art—in quite other values—a fourth-dimensional world, as it
were. It wasn't fair to judge her in her present surroundings, ideal as
they were in one way—a way that unfortunately didn't happen to be
hers! Mrs. Landish persisted in assuming Manford's complete
comprehension ... "If Jim could only be made to understand as you do; to
see that ordinary standards don't apply to these rare natures... Why,
has the child told you what Klawhammer has offered her to turn <i>one
film</i> for him, before even having seen her dance, just on the
strength of what Jack Staley and Ardwin had told him?"
</p>
<p>
Ah—there it was! The truth was out. Mrs. Landish, always in debt, and
always full of crazy schemes for wasting more money, had seen a gold
mine in the exploitation of her niece's gifts. The divorce, instead of
frightening her, delighted her. Manford smiled as he thought how little
she would be moved by Pauline's threat to cut off the young couple.
Pauline sometimes forgot that, even in her own family, her authority was
not absolute. She could certainly not compete financially with
Hollywood, and Mrs. Landish's eyes were on Hollywood.
</p>
<p>
"Dear Mr. Manford—but you look shocked! Absolutely shocked! Does
the screen really frighten you? How funny!" Mrs. Landish, drawing her
rambling eyebrows together, seemed trying to picture the inner darkness
of such a state. "But surely you know the smartest people are going in
for it? Why, the Marchesa di San Fedele was showing me the other day a
photograph of that beautiful son of hers—one of those really
<i>Greek</i> beings in bathing tights—and telling me that
Klawhammer, who had seen it, had authorized her to cable him to come out
to Hollywood on trial, all expenses paid. It seems they can almost
always recognize the eurythmic people at a glance. Funny, wouldn't it
be, if Michelangelo and Lita turned out to be the future Valentino
and—"
</p>
<p>
He didn't remember the rest of the rigmarole. He could only recall
shouting out, with futile vehemence: "My wife and I will do everything
to prevent a divorce—" and leaving his astonished hostess on a threat
of which he knew the uselessness as well as she did.
</p>
<p>
That was the air in which Lita had grown up, those were the gods of
Viking Court! Yet Manford had stormed instead of pitying, been furious
instead of tolerant, risked disaster for Lita and Jim instead of taking
calm control of the situation. The vision of Lita Wyant and Michelangelo
as future film stars, "featured" jointly on every hoarding from Maine to
California, had sent the blood to his head. Through a mist of rage he
had seen the monstrous pictures and conjectured the loathsome
letter-press. And no one would do more than look and laugh! At the
thought, he felt the destructive ire of the man who finds his private
desires pitted against the tendencies of his age. Well, they would see,
that was all: he would show them!
</p>
<p>
The resolve to act brought relief to his straining imagination. Once
again he felt himself seated at his office desk, all his professional
authority between him and his helpless interlocutors, and impressive
words and skilful arguments ordering themselves automatically in his
mind. After all, he was the head of his family—in some degree even of
Wyant's family.
</p>


</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
