<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<p>It was exasperating, the way the Vollard girl lurked and ogled‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Undoubtedly she was their best typist: mechanically perfect, with a smattering of French and Italian useful in linguistic emergencies. There could be no question of replacing her. But, apart from her job, what a poor Poll! And always‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere was no denying it, the office smiled over it‚ÅÝ‚Äîalways finding excuses to intrude on Manford‚Äôs privacy: a hurry trunk-call, a signature forgotten, a final question to ask, a message from one of the other members of the firm‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ she seized her pretexts cleverly‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And when she left him nowadays, he always got up, squared his shoulders, studied himself critically in the mirror over the mantelpiece, and hated her the more for having caused him to do anything so silly.</p>
				<p>This afternoon her excuse had been flimsier than usual: a new point to be noted against her. ‚ÄúOne of the gentlemen left it on his desk. There‚Äôs a picture in it that‚Äôll amuse you. Oh, you don‚Äôt mind my bringing it in?‚Äù she gasped.</p>
				<p>Manford was just leaving; overcoat on, hat and stick in hand. He muttered: ‚ÄúOh, thanks,‚Äù and took the ‚ÄúLooker-on‚Äù in order to cut short her effusions. A picture that might amuse him! The simpleton‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Probably some of those elaborate ‚Äúartistic‚Äù studies of the Cedarledge gardens. He remembered that his wife had allowed the ‚ÄúLooker-on‚Äù photographers to take them last summer. She thought it a duty: it might help to spread the love of gardening (another of her hobbies); and besides it was undemocratic to refuse to share one‚Äôs private privileges with the multitude. He knew all her catchwords and had reached the point of wondering how much she would have valued her privileges had the multitude not been there to share them.</p>
				<p>He thrust the magazine under his arm, and threw it down, half an hour later, in Lita Wyant‚Äôs boudoir. It was so quiet and shadowy there that he was almost glad Lita was not in, though sometimes her unpunctuality annoyed him. This evening, after the rush and confusion of the day, he found it soothing to await her in this half-lit room, with its heaped-up cushions still showing where she had leaned, and the veiled light on two arums in a dark bowl. Wherever Lita was, there were some of those smooth sculptural arums.</p>
				<p>When she came, the stillness would hardly be disturbed. She had a way of deepening it by her presence: noise and hurry died on her threshold. And this evening all the house was quiet. Manford, as usual, had tiptoed up to take a look at the baby, in the night nursery where there were such cool silver-coloured walls, and white hyacinths in pots of silvery lustre. The baby slept, a round pink Hercules with defiant rosy curls, his pink hands clenched on the coverlet. Even the nurse by the lamp sat quiet and silver-coloured as a brooding pigeon.</p>
				<p>A house without fixed hours, engagements, obligations‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ where none of the clocks went, and nobody was late, because there was no particular time for anything to happen. Absurd, of course, maddeningly unpractical‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut how restful after a crowded day! And what a miracle to have achieved, in the tight pattern of New York‚Äôs tasks and pleasures‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the very place which seemed doomed to collapse and vanish if ever its clocks should stop!</p>
				<p>These late visits had begun by Manford‚Äôs dropping in on the way home for a look at the baby. He liked babies in their cribs, and especially this fat rascal of Jim‚Äôs. Next to Nona, there was no one he cared for as much as Jim; and seeing Jim happily married, doing well at his bank, and with that funny little chap upstairs, stirred in the older man all his old regrets that he had no son.</p>
				<p>Jim seldom got back early enough to assist at these visits; and Lita too, at first, was generally out. But in the last few months Manford had more often found her‚ÅÝ‚Äîor at least, having fallen into the habit of lingering over a cigarette in her boudoir, had managed to get a glimpse of her before going on to that other house where all the clocks struck simultaneously, and the week‚Äôs engagements, in Maisie Bruss‚Äôs hand, jumped out at him as he entered his study.</p>
				<p>This evening he felt more than usually tired‚ÅÝ‚Äîof his day, his work, his life, himself‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, especially himself; so tired that, the deep armchair aiding, he slipped into a half-doze in which the quietness crept up round him like a tide.</p>
				<p>He woke with a start, imagining that Lita had entered, and feeling the elderly man‚Äôs discomfiture when beauty finds him napping‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But the room was empty: a movement of his own had merely knocked Miss Vollard‚Äôs magazine to the floor. He remembered having brought it in to show Lita the photographs of Cedarledge which he supposed it to contain. Would there be time? He consulted his watch‚ÅÝ‚Äîan anachronism in that house‚ÅÝ‚Äîlit another cigarette, and leaned back contentedly. He knew that as soon as he got home Pauline, who had telephoned again that afternoon about the Mahatma, would contrive to corner him and reopen the tiresome question, together with another, which threatened to be almost equally tiresome, about paying that rotten Michelangelo‚Äôs debts. ‚ÄúIf we don‚Äôt, we shall have him here on our hands: Amalasuntha is convinced you‚Äôll take him into the firm. You‚Äôd better come home in time to talk things over‚ÅÝ‚Äî.‚Äù Always talking over, interfering, adjusting! He had enough of that in his profession. Pity Pauline wasn‚Äôt a lawyer: she might have worked off her steam in office hours. He would sit quietly where he was, taking care to reach his house only just in time to dress and join her in the motor. They were dining out, he couldn‚Äôt remember where.</p>
				<p>For a moment his wife‚Äôs figure stood out before him in brilliant stony relief, like a photograph seen through a stereopticon; then it vanished in the mist of his well-being, the indolence engendered by waiting there alone and undisturbed for Lita. Queer creature, Lita! His lips twitched into a reminiscent smile. One day she had come up noiselessly behind him and surprised him by a light kiss on his hair. He had thought it was Nona‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Since then he had sometimes feigned to doze while he waited; but she had never kissed him again‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>What sort of a life did she really lead, he wondered? And what did she make of Jim, now the novelty was over? He could think of no two people who seemed less made for each other. But you never could tell with a woman. Jim was young and adoring; and there was that redheaded boy‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>Luckily Lita liked Nona, and the two were a good deal together. Nona was as safe as a bank‚ÅÝ‚Äîand as jolly as a cricket. Everything was sure to be right when she was there. But there were all the other hours, intervals that Manford had no way of accounting for; and Pauline always said the girl had had a queer bringing-up, as indeed any girl must have had at the hands of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPercy Landish. Pauline had objected to the marriage on that ground, though the modern mother‚Äôs respect for the independence of her children had reduced her objection to mere shadowy hints of which Jim, in his transports, took no heed.</p>
				<p>Manford also disliked the girl at first, and deplored Jim‚Äôs choice. He thought Lita positively ugly, with her high cheekbones, her too small head, her glaring clothes and conceited lackadaisical airs. Then, as time passed, and the marriage appeared after all to be turning out well, he tried to interest himself in her for Jim‚Äôs sake, to see in her what Jim apparently did. But the change had not come till the boy‚Äôs birth. Then, as she lay in her pillows, a new shadowiness under her golden lashes, one petal of a hand hollowed under the little red head at her side, the vision struck to his heart. The enchantment did not last; he never recaptured it; there were days when what he called her ‚Äúbeauty airs‚Äù exasperated him, others when he was chilled by her triviality. But she never bored him, never ceased to excite in him a sort of irritated interest. He told himself that it was because one could never be sure what she was up to; speculating on what went on behind that smooth round forehead and those elusive eyes became his most absorbing occupation.</p>
				<p>At first he used to be glad when Nona turned up, and when Jim came in from his bank, fagged but happy, and the three young people sat talking nonsense, and letting Manford smoke and listen. But gradually he had fallen into the way of avoiding Nona‚Äôs days, and of coming earlier (extricating himself with difficulty from his professional engagements), so that he might find Lita alone before Jim arrived.</p>
				<p>Lately she had seemed restless, vaguely impatient with things; and Manford was determined to win her confidence and get at the riddle behind that smooth round brow. He could not bear the idea that Jim‚Äôs marriage might turn out to be a mere unsuccessful adventure, like so many others. Lita must be made to understand what a treasure she possessed, and how easily she might lose it. Lita Cliffe‚ÅÝ‚Äî<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPercy Landish‚Äôs niece‚ÅÝ‚Äîto have had the luck to marry Jim Wyant, and to risk estranging him! What fools women were! If she could be got away from the pack of frauds and flatterers who surrounded her, Manford felt sure he could bring her to her senses. Sometimes, in her quiet moods, she seemed to depend on his judgment, to defer rather touchingly to what he said‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>The thing would be to coax her from jazz and nightclubs, and the pseudo-artistic rabble of house-decorators, cinema stars and theatrical riffraff who had invaded her life, to get her back to country joys, golf and tennis and boating, all the healthy outdoor activities. She liked them well enough when there were no others available. She had owned to Manford that she was sick of the rush and needed a rest; had half promised to come to Cedarledge with the boy for Easter. Jim would be taking his father down to the island off the Georgia coast; and Jim‚Äôs being away might be a good thing. These modern young women soon tired of what they were used to; Lita would appreciate her husband all the more after a separation.</p>
				<p>Well, only a few weeks more, and perhaps it would come true. She had never seen the Cedarledge dogwood in bud, the woods trembling into green. Manford, smiling at the vision, stooped to pick up the ‚ÄúLooker-on‚Äù and refresh his memory.</p>
				<p>But it wasn‚Äôt the right number: there were no gardens in it. Why had Miss Vollard given it to him? As he fluttered the pages they dropped open at: ‚ÄúOriental Sage in Native Garb‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî. Oh, damn the Mahatma! ‚ÄúDawnside Co-Eds‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, damn‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>He stood up to thrust the paper under one of the heavily-shaded lamps. At home, where Pauline and reason ruled, the lighting was disposed in such a way that one could always read without moving from one‚Äôs chair; but in this ridiculous house, where no one ever opened a book, the lamps were so perversely placed, and so deeply shrouded, that one had to hold one‚Äôs paper under the shade to make out anything.</p>
				<p>He scrutinized the picture, shrugged away his disgusted recognition of Bee Lindon, looked again and straightened his eyeglasses on his nose to be doubly sure‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe lawyer‚Äôs instinct of accuracy prevailing over a furious inward tremor.</p>
				<p>He walked to the door, and then turned back and stood irresolute. To study the picture he had lifted the border of the lampshade, and the light struck crudely on the statue above Lita‚Äôs divan; the statue of which Pauline (to her children‚Äôs amusement) always said a little apprehensively that she supposed it must be Cubist. Manford had hardly noticed the figure before, except to wonder why the young people admired ugliness: half lost in the shadows of the niche, it seemed a mere bundle of lumpy limbs. Now, in the glare‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAh, you carrion, you!‚Äù He clenched his fist at it. ‚Äú<em>That‚Äôs</em> what they want‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs their brutish idol!‚Äù The words came stammering from him in a blur of rage. It was on Jim‚Äôs account‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ the shock, the degradation‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The paper slipped to the floor, and he dropped into his seat again.</p>
				<p>Slowly his mind worked its way back through the disgust and confusion. Pauline had been right: what could one expect from a girl brought up in that Landish house? Very likely no one had ever thought of asking where she was, where she had been‚ÅÝ‚Äî<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLandish, absorbed in her own silly affairs, would be the last person to know.</p>
				<p>Well, what of that? The modern girl was always free, was expected to know how to use her freedom. Nona‚Äôs independence had been as scrupulously respected as Jim‚Äôs; she had had her full share of the perpetual modern agitations. Yet Nona was firm as a rock: a man‚Äôs heart could build on her. If a woman was naturally straight, jazz and nightclubs couldn‚Äôt make her crooked‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>True, in Nona‚Äôs case there had been Pauline‚Äôs influence: Pauline who, whatever her faults, was always good-humoured and usually wise with her children. The proof was that, while they laughed at her, they adored her: he had to do her that justice. At the thought of Pauline a breath of freshness and honesty swept through him. He had been unfair to her lately, critical, irritable. He had been absorbing a slow poison, the poison emanating from this dusky self-conscious room, with all its pernicious implications. His first impression of Lita, when he had thought her ugly and pretentious, rushed back on him, dissipating the enchantment.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, I‚Äôm glad you waited‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù She was there before him, her little heart-shaped face deep in its furs, like a bird on the nest. ‚ÄúI wanted to see you today; I <em>willed</em> you to wait.‚Äù She stood there, her head slightly on one side, distilling her gaze through half-parted lids like some rare golden liquid.</p>
				<p>Manford stared back. Her entrance had tangled up the words in his throat: he stood before her choked with denunciation and invective. And then it occurred to him how much easier it was just to say nothing‚ÅÝ‚Äîand to go. Of course he meant to go. It was no business of his: Jim Wyant was not his son. Thank God he could wash his hands of the whole affair.</p>
				<p>He mumbled: ‚ÄúDining out. Can‚Äôt wait.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, but you must!‚Äù Her hand was on his arm, as light as a petal. ‚ÄúI want you.‚Äù He could just see the twinkle of small round teeth as her upper lip lifted‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúCan‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ can‚Äôt.‚Äù He tried to disengage his voice, as if that too were tangled up in her.</p>
				<p>He moved away toward the door. The ‚ÄúLooker-on‚Äù lay on the floor between them. So much the better; she would find it when he was gone! She would understand then why he hadn‚Äôt waited. And no fear of Jim‚Äôs getting hold of the paper; trust her to make it disappear!</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhy, what‚Äôs that?‚Äù She bent her supple height to pick it up and moved to the lamp, her face alight.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou darling, you‚ÅÝ‚Äîdid you bring me this? What luck! I‚Äôve been all over the place hunting for a copy‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe whole edition‚Äôs sold out. I had the original photograph somewhere, but couldn‚Äôt put my hand on it.‚Äù</p>
				<p>She had reached the fatal page; she was spreading it open. Her smile caressed it; her mouth looked like a pink pod bursting on a row of pearly seeds. She turned to Manford almost tenderly. ‚ÄúAfter you prevented my going to Ardwin‚Äôs I had to swear to send this to Klawhammer, to show that I really <em>can</em> dance. Tommy telephoned at daylight that Klawhammer was off to Hollywood, and that when I chucked last night they all said it was because I knew I couldn‚Äôt come up to the scratch.‚Äù She held out the picture with an air of pride. ‚ÄúDoesn‚Äôt look much like it, does it?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Why, what are you staring at? Didn‚Äôt you know I was going in for the movies? Immobility was never my strong point‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù She threw the paper down, and began to undo her furs with a lazy smile, sketching a dance step as she did so. ‚ÄúWhy do you look so shocked? If I don‚Äôt do that I shall run away with Michelangelo. I suppose you know that Amalasuntha‚Äôs importing him? I can‚Äôt stick this sort of thing much longer‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Besides, we‚Äôve all got a right to self-expression, haven‚Äôt we?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Manford continued to look at her. He hardly heard what she was saying, in the sickness of realizing what she was. Those were the thoughts, the dreams, behind those temples on which the light laid such pearly circles!</p>
				<p>He said slowly: ‚ÄúThis picture‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs true, then? You‚Äôve been there?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDawnside? Bless you‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere‚Äôd you suppose I learnt to dance? Aunt Kitty used to plant me out there whenever she wanted to go off on her own‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich was pretty frequently.‚Äù She had tossed off her hat, slipped out of her furs, and lowered the flounce of the lampshade; and there she stood before him in her scant slim dress, her arms, bare to the shoulder, lifted in an amphora-gesture to her little head.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, children‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I‚Äôm bored!‚Äù she yawned.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
