<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p>The door of his private office clicked on a withdrawing client, and Dexter Manford, giving his vigorous shoulders a shake, rose from his desk and stood irresolute.</p>
				<p>“I must get out to Cedarledge for some golf on Saturday,” he thought. He lived among people who regarded golf as a universal panacea, and in a world which believed in panaceas.</p>
				<p>As he stood there, his glance lit on the looking-glass above the mantel and he mustered his image impatiently. Queer thing, for a man of his age to gape at himself in a looking-glass like a dago dancing-master! He saw a swarthy straight-nosed face, dark crinkling hair with a dash of gray on the temples, dark eyes under brows that were beginning to beetle across a deep vertical cleft. Complexion turning from ruddy to sallow; eyes heavy⁠—would he put his tongue out next? The matter with him was⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>He dropped back into his desk-chair and unhooked the telephone receiver.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> James Wyant? Yes⁠ ⁠… Oh⁠—<em>out</em>? You’re sure? And you don’t know when she’ll be back? Who? Yes; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Manford. I had a message for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wyant. No matter.”</p>
				<p>He hung up and leaned back, stretching his legs under the table and staring moodily at the heap of letters and legal papers in the morocco-lined baskets set out before him.</p>
				<p>“I look ten years older than my age,” he thought. Yet that last new typewriter, Miss Vollard, or whatever her name was, really behaved as if⁠ ⁠… was always looking at him when she thought he wasn’t looking⁠ ⁠… “Oh, what rot!” he exclaimed.</p>
				<p>His day had been as all his days were now: a starting in with a great sense of pressure, importance and authority⁠—and a drop at the close into staleness and futility.</p>
				<p>The evening before, he had stopped to see his doctor and been told that he was overworking, and needed a nerve-tonic and a change of scene. “Cruise to the West Indies, or something of the sort. Couldn’t you get away for three or four weeks? No? Well, more golf then, anyhow.”</p>
				<p>Getting away from things; the perpetual evasion, moral, mental, physical, which he heard preached, and saw practised, everywhere about him, except where moneymaking was concerned! He, Dexter Manford, who had been brought up on a Minnesota farm, paid his own way through the State College at Delos, and his subsequent course in the Harvard Law School; and who, ever since, had been working at the top of his pitch with no more sense of strain, no more desire for evasion (shirking, he called it) than a healthy able-bodied man of fifty had a right to feel! If his task had been mere money-getting he might have known⁠—and acknowledged⁠—weariness. But he gloried in his profession, in its labours and difficulties as well as its rewards, it satisfied him intellectually and gave him that calm sense of mastery⁠—mastery over himself and others⁠—known only to those who are doing what they were born to do.</p>
				<p>Of course, at every stage of his career⁠—and never more than now, on its slippery pinnacle⁠—he had suffered the thousand irritations inseparable from a hardworking life: the trifles which waste one’s time, the fools who consume one’s patience, the tricky failure of the best-laid plans, the endless labour of rolling human stupidity up the steep hill of understanding. But until lately these things had been a stimulus: it had amused him to shake off trifles, baffle bores, circumvent failure, and exercise his mental muscles in persuading stupid people to do intelligent things. There was pioneer blood in him: he was used to starting out every morning to hack his way through a fresh growth of prejudices and obstacles; and though he liked his big retaining fees he liked arguing a case even better.</p>
				<p>Professionally, he was used to intellectual loneliness, and no longer minded it. Outside of his profession he had a brain above the average, but a general education hardly up to it; and the discrepancy between what he would have been capable of enjoying had his mind been prepared for it, and what it could actually take in, made him modest and almost shy in what he considered cultivated society. He had long believed his wife to be cultivated because she had fits of book-buying and there was an expensively bound library in the New York house. In his raw youth, in the old Delos days, he had got together a little library of his own in which Robert Ingersoll’s lectures represented science, the sermons of the Reverend Frank Gunsaulus of Chicago, theology, John Burroughs, natural history, and Jared Sparks and Bancroft almost the whole of history. He had gradually discovered the inadequacy of these guides, but without ever having done much to replace them. Now and then, when he was not too tired, and had the rare chance of a quiet evening, he picked up a book from Pauline’s table; but the works she acquired were so heterogeneous, and of such unequal value, that he rarely found one worth reading. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tallentyre’s “Voltaire” had been a revelation: he discovered, to his surprise, that he had never really known who Voltaire was, or what sort of a world he had lived in, and why his name had survived it. After that, Manford decided to start in on a course of European history, and got as far as taking the first volume of Macaulay up to bed. But he was tired at night, and found Macaulay’s periods too long (though their eloquence appealed to his forensic instinct): and there had never been time for that course of history.</p>
				<p>In his early wedded days, before he knew much of his wife’s world, he had dreamed of quiet evenings at home, when Pauline would read instructive books aloud while he sat by the fire and turned over his briefs in some quiet inner chamber of his mind. But Pauline had never known anyone who wanted to be read aloud to except children getting over infantile complaints. She regarded the desire almost as a symptom of illness, and decided that Dexter needed “rousing,” and that she must do more to amuse him. As soon as she was able after Nona’s birth she girt herself up for this new duty; and from that day Manford’s life, out of office hours, had been one of almost incessant social activity. At first the endless going out had bewildered, then for a while amused and flattered him, then gradually grown to be a soothing routine, a sort of mild drug-taking after the high pressure of professional hours; but of late it had become simply a bore, a duty to be persisted in because⁠—as he had at last discovered⁠—Pauline could not live without it. After twenty years of marriage he was only just beginning to exercise his intellectual acumen on his wife.</p>
				<p>The thought of Pauline made him glance at his clock: she would be coming in a moment. He unhooked the receiver again, and named, impatiently, the same number as before. “Out, you say? Still?” (The same stupid voice making the same stupid answer!) “Oh, no; no matter. I say <em>it’s no matter</em>,” he almost shouted, replacing the receiver. Of all idiotic servants⁠—!</p>
				<p>Miss Vollard, the susceptible typewriter, shot a shingled head around the door, said “<em>All</em> right” with an envious sigh to someone outside, and effaced herself before the brisk entrance of her employer’s wife. Manford got to his feet.</p>
				<p>“Well, my dear⁠—” He pushed an armchair near the fire, solicitous, still a little awed by her presence⁠—the beautiful <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wyant who had deigned to marry him. Pauline, throwing back her furs, cast a quick housekeeping glance about her. The scent she used always reminded him of a superior disinfectant; and in another moment, he knew, she would find some pretext for assuring herself, by the application of a gloved fingertip, that there was no dust on desk or mantelpiece. She had very nearly obliged him, when he moved into his new office, to have concave surbases, as in a hospital ward or a hygienic nursery. She had adopted with enthusiasm the idea of the concave tiling fitted to every cove and angle, so that there were no corners anywhere to catch the dust. People’s lives ought to be like that: with no corners in them. She wanted to de-microbe life.</p>
				<p>But, in the case of his own office, Manford had resisted; and now, he understood, the fad had gone to the scrapheap⁠—with how many others!</p>
				<p>“Not too near the fire.” Pauline pushed her armchair back and glanced up to see if the ceiling ventilators were working. “You <em>do</em> renew the air at regular intervals? I’m sure everything depends on that; that and thought-direction. What the Mahatma calls mental deep-breathing.” She smiled persuasively. “You look tired, Dexter⁠ ⁠… tired and drawn.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, rot!⁠—A cigarette?”</p>
				<p>She shook her small resolute head. “You forget that he’s cured me of that too⁠—the Mahatma. Dexter,” she exclaimed suddenly, “I’m sure it’s this silly business of the Grant Lindons’ that’s worrying you. I want to talk to you about it⁠—to clear it up with you. It’s out of the question that you should be mixed up in it.”</p>
				<p>Manford had gone back to his desk-chair. Habit made him feel more at home there, in fuller possession of himself; Pauline, in the seat facing him, the light full on her, seemed no more than a client to be advised, or an opponent to be talked over. He knew she felt the difference too. So far he had managed to preserve his professional privacy and his professional authority. What he did “at the office” was clouded over, for his family, by the vague word “business,” which meant that a man didn’t want to be bothered. Pauline had never really distinguished between practising the law and manufacturing motors; nor had Manford encouraged her to. But today he suspected that she meant her interference to go to the extreme limit which her well-known “tact” would permit.</p>
				<p>“You must not be mixed up in this investigation. Why not hand it over to somebody else? Alfred Cosby, or that new Jew who’s so clever? The Lindons would accept anyone you recommended; unless, of course,” she continued, “you could persuade them to drop it, which would be so much better. I’m sure you could, Dexter; you always know what to say⁠—and your opinion carries such weight. Besides, what is it they complain of? Some nonsense of Bee’s, I’ve no doubt⁠—she took a rest-cure at the School. If they’d brought the girl up properly there’d have been no trouble. Look at Nona!”</p>
				<p>“Oh⁠—Nona!” Manford gave a laugh of pride. Nona was the one warm rich spot in his life: the corner on which the sun always shone. Fancy comparing that degenerate fool of a Bee Lindon to his Nona, and imagining that “bringing-up” made the difference! Still, he had to admit that Pauline⁠—always admirable⁠—had been especially so as a mother. Yet she too was bitten with this theosophical virus!</p>
				<p>He lounged back, hands in pockets, one leg swinging, instinctively seeking an easier attitude as his moral ease diminished.</p>
				<p>“My dear, it’s always been understood, hasn’t it, that what goes on in this office is between me and my clients, and not⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Oh, nonsense, Dexter!” She seldom took that tone: he saw that she was losing her self-control. “Look here: I make it a rule never to interfere; you’ve just said so. Well⁠—if I interfere now, it’s because I’ve a right to⁠—because it’s a duty! The Lindons are my son’s cousins: Fanny Lindon was a Wyant. Isn’t that reason enough?”</p>
				<p>“It was one of the Lindons’ reasons. They appealed to me on that very ground.”</p>
				<p>Pauline gave an irritated laugh. “How like Fanny! Always pushing in and claiming things. I wonder such an argument took you in. Do consider, Dexter! I won’t for a minute admit that there can be anything wrong about the Mahatma; but supposing there were⁠ ⁠…” She drew herself up, her lips tightening. “I hope I know how to respect professional secrecy, and I don’t ask you to repeat their nasty insinuations; in fact, as you know, I always take particular pains to avoid hearing anything painful or offensive. But, supposing there were any ground for what they say; do they realize how the publicity is going to affect Bee’s reputation? And how shall you feel if you set the police at work and find them publishing the name of a girl who is Jim’s cousin, and a friend of your own daughter’s?”</p>
				<p>Manford moved restlessly in his chair, and in so doing caught his reflection in the mirror, and saw that his jaw had lost its stern professional cast. He made an attempt to recover it, but unsuccessfully.</p>
				<p>“But all this is too absurd,” Pauline continued on a smoother note. “The Mahatma and his friends have nothing to fear. Whose judgment would you sooner trust: mine, or poor Fanny’s? What really bothers me is your allowing the Lindons to drag you into an affair which is going to discredit them, and not the Mahatma.” She smiled her bright frosty smile. “You know how proud I am of your professional prestige: I should hate to have you associated with a failure.” She paused, and he saw that she meant to rest on that.</p>
				<p>“This is a pretty bad business. The Lindons have got their proofs all right,” he said.</p>
				<p>Pauline reddened, and her face lost its look of undaunted serenity. “How can you believe such rubbish, Dexter? If you’re going to take Fanny Lindon’s word against mine⁠—”</p>
				<p>“It’s not a question of your word or hers. Lindon is fully documented: he didn’t come to me till he was. I’m sorry, Pauline; but you’ve been deceived. This man has got to be shown up, and the Lindons have had the pluck to do what everybody else has shirked.”</p>
				<p>Pauline’s angry colour had faded. She got up and stood before her husband, distressed and uncertain; then, with a visible effort at self-command, she seated herself again, and locked her hands about her gold-mounted bag.</p>
				<p>“Then you’d rather the scandal, if there is one, should be paraded before the world? Who will gain by that except the newspaper reporters, and the people who want to drag down society? And how shall you feel if Nona is called as a witness⁠—or Lita?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, nonsense⁠—” He stopped abruptly, and got up too. The discussion was lasting longer than he had intended, and he could not find the word to end it. His mind felt suddenly empty⁠—empty of arguments and formulas. “I don’t know why you persist in bringing in Nona⁠—or Lita⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I don’t; it’s you. You will, that is, if you take this case. Bee and Nona have been intimate since they were babies, and Bee is always at Lita’s. Don’t you suppose the Mahatma’s lawyers will make use of that if you <em>oblige</em> him to fight? You may say you’re prepared for it; and I admire your courage⁠—but I can’t share it. The idea that our children may be involved simply sickens me.”</p>
				<p>“Neither Nona nor Lita has ever had anything to do with this charlatan and his humbug, as far as I know,” said Manford irritably.</p>
				<p>“Nona has attended his eurythmic classes at our house, and gone to his lectures with me: at one time they interested her intensely.” Pauline paused. “About Lita I don’t know: I know so little about Lita’s life before her marriage.”</p>
				<p>“It was presumably that of any of Nona’s other girl friends.”</p>
				<p>“Presumably. Kitty Landish might enlighten us. But of course, if it <em>was</em>⁠—” he noted her faintly sceptical emphasis⁠—“I don’t admit that that would preclude Lita’s having known the Mahatma, or believed in him. And you must remember, Dexter, that I should be the most deeply involved of all! I mean to take a rest-cure at Dawnside in March.” She gave the little playful laugh with which she had been used, in old times, to ridicule the naughtiness of her children.</p>
				<p>Manford drummed on his blotting-pad. “Look here, suppose we drop this for the present⁠—”</p>
				<p>She glanced at her wristwatch. “If you can spare the time⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Spare the time?”</p>
				<p>She answered softly: “I’m not going away till you’ve promised.”</p>
				<p>Manford could remember the day when that tone⁠—so feminine under its firmness⁠—would have had the power to shake him. Pauline, in her wifely dealings, so seldom invoked the prerogative of her grace, her competence, her persuasiveness, that when she did he had once found it hard to resist. But that day was past. Under his admiration for her brains, and his esteem for her character, he had felt, of late, a stealing boredom. She was too clever, too efficient, too uniformly sagacious and serene. Perhaps his own growing sense of power⁠—professional and social⁠—had secretly undermined his awe of hers, made him feel himself first her equal, then ever so little her superior. He began to detect something obtuse in that unfaltering competence. And as his professional authority grew he had become more jealous of interference with it. His wife ought at least to have understood that! If her famous tact were going to fail her, what would be left, he asked himself?</p>
				<p>“Look here, Pauline, you know all this is useless. In professional matters no one else can judge for me. I’m busy this afternoon; I’m sure you are too⁠—”</p>
				<p>She settled more deeply into her armchair. “Never too busy for you, Dexter.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you, dear. But the time I ask you to give me is outside of business hours,” he rejoined with a slight smile.</p>
				<p>“Then I’m dismissed?” She smiled back. “I understand; you needn’t ring!” She rose with recovered serenity and laid a light hand on his shoulder. “Sorry to have bothered you; I don’t often, do I? All I ask is that you should think over⁠—”</p>
				<p>He lifted the hand to his lips. “Of course, of course.” Now that she was going he could say it.</p>
				<p>“I’m forgiven?”</p>
				<p>He smiled: “You’re forgiven;” and from the threshold she called, almost gaily: “Don’t forget tonight⁠—Amalasuntha!”</p>
				<p>His brow clouded as he returned to his chair; and oddly enough⁠—he was aware of the oddness⁠—it was clouded not by the tiresome scene he had been through, but by his wife’s reminder. “Damn that dinner,” he swore to himself.</p>
				<p>He turned to the telephone, unhooked it for the third time, and called for the same number.</p>
				<p>That evening, as he slipped the key into his front-door, Dexter Manford felt the oppression of all that lay behind it. He never entered his house without a slight consciousness of the importance of the act⁠—never completely took for granted the resounding vestibule, the big hall with its marble staircase ascending to all the light and warmth and luxury which skill could devise, money buy, and Pauline’s ingenuity combine in a harmonious whole. He had not yet forgotten the day when, after one of his first legal successes, he had installed a bathroom in his mother’s house at Delos, and all the neighbours had driven in from miles around to see it.</p>
				<p>But luxury, and above all comfort, had never weighed on him; he was too busy to think much about them, and sure enough of himself and his powers to accept them as his right. It was not the splendour of his house that oppressed him but the sense of the corporative bonds it imposed. It seemed part of an elaborate social and domestic structure, put together with the baffling ingenuity of certain bird’s-nests of which he had seen the pictures. His own career, Pauline’s multiple activities, the problem of poor Arthur Wyant, Nona, Jim, Lita Wyant, the Mahatma, the tiresome Grant Lindons, the perennial and inevitable Amalasuntha, for whom the house was being illuminated tonight⁠—all were strands woven into the very pile of the carpet he trod on his way up the stairs. As he passed the dining-room he saw, through half-open doors, the glitter of glass and silver, a shirt-sleeved man placing bowls of roses down the long table, and Maisie Bruss, wan but undaunted, dealing out dinner cards to Powder, the English butler.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
