<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2><a id="chap18"/>XVIII</h2>
				<p>‚ÄúLita? But of course I‚Äôll talk to Lita‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù Mrs.¬ÝManford, resting one elbow on her littered desk, smiled up encouragingly at her daughter. On the desk lay the final version of the Birth Control speech, mastered and canalized by the skilful Maisie. The result was so pleasing that Pauline would have liked to read it aloud to Nona, had the latter not worn her look of concentrated care. It was a pity, Pauline thought, that Nona should let herself go at her age to these moods of anxiety and discouragement.</p>
				<p>Pauline herself, fortified by her morning exercises, and by a ‚Äúdouble treatment‚Äù ($50) from Alvah Loft, had soared once more above her own perplexities. She had not had time for a word alone with her husband since their strange talk of the previous evening; but already the doubts and uncertainties produced by that talk had been dispelled. Of course Dexter had been moody and irritable: wasn‚Äôt her family always piling up one worry on him after another? He had always loved Jim as much as he did Nona; and now this menace to Jim‚Äôs happiness, and the unpleasantness about Lita, combined with Amalasuntha‚Äôs barefaced demands, and the threatened arrival of the troublesome Michelangelo‚ÅÝ‚Äîsuch a weight of domestic problems was enough to unnerve a man already overburdened with professional cares.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut of course I‚Äôll talk to Lita, dear; I always meant to. The silly goose! I‚Äôve waited only because your father‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Nona‚Äôs heavy eyebrows ran together like Manford‚Äôs. ‚ÄúFather?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, he‚Äôs helping us so splendidly about it. And he asked me to wait; to do nothing in a hurry‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>Nona seemed to turn this over. ‚ÄúAll the same‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think you ought to hear what Lita has to say. She‚Äôs trying to persuade Jim to let her divorce him; and he thinks he ought to, if he can‚Äôt make her happy.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut he <i>must</i> make her happy! I‚Äôll talk to Jim too,‚Äù cried Pauline with a gay determination.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôd try Lita first, mother. Ask her to postpone her decision. If we can get her to come to Cedarledge for a few weeks‚Äô rest‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYes; that‚Äôs what your father says.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut I don‚Äôt think father ought to give up his fishing to join us. Haven‚Äôt you noticed how tired he looks? He ought to get away from all of us for a few weeks. Why shouldn‚Äôt you and I look after Lita?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline‚Äôs enthusiasm drooped. It was really no business of Nona‚Äôs to give her mother advice about the management of her father. These modern girls‚ÅÝ‚Äîpity Nona didn‚Äôt marry, and try managing a husband of her own!</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYour father loves Cedarledge. It‚Äôs quite his own idea to go there. He thinks Easter in the country with us all will be more restful than California. I haven‚Äôt influenced him in the least to give up his fishing.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, I didn‚Äôt suppose you had.‚Äù Nona seemed to lose interest in the discussion, and her mother took advantage of the fact to add, with a gentle side-glance at her watch: ‚ÄúIs there anything else, dear? Because I‚Äôve got to go over my Birth Control speech, and at eleven there‚Äôs a delegation from‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Nona‚Äôs eyes had followed her glance to the scattered pages on the desk. ‚ÄúAre you really going to preside at that Birth Control dinner, mother?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúPreside? Why not? I happen to be chairman,‚Äù Pauline answered with a faint touch of acerbity.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI know. Only‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe other day you were preaching unlimited families. Don‚Äôt the two speeches come rather close together? You might expose yourself to some newspaper chaff if any one put you in parallel columns.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline felt herself turning pale. Her lips tightened, and for a moment she was conscious of a sort of blur in her brain. This girl‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ it was preposterous that she shouldn‚Äôt understand! And always wanting reasons and explanations at a moment‚Äôs notice! To be subjected, under one‚Äôs own roof, to such a perpetual inquisition‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ There was nothing she disliked so much as questions to which she had not had time to prepare the answers.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think you always grasp things, Nona.‚Äù The words were feeble, but they were the first that came.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm afraid I don‚Äôt, mother.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThen, perhaps‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI just suggest it‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou oughtn‚Äôt to be quite so ready to criticize. You seem to imagine there is a contradiction in my belonging to these two groups of‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ of thought‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThey do seem to contradict each other.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNot in reality. The principles are different, of course; but, you see, they are meant to apply to‚ÅÝ‚Äîto different categories of people. It‚Äôs all a little difficult to explain to any one as young as you are‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a girl naturally can‚Äôt be expected to know‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, what we girls don‚Äôt know, mother!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, dear, I‚Äôve always approved of outspokenness on such matters. The real nastiness is in covering things up. But all the same, age and experience <i>do</i> teach one‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You children mustn‚Äôt hope to get at all your elders‚Äô reasons‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù That sounded firm yet friendly, and as she spoke she felt herself on safer ground. ‚ÄúI wish there were time to go into it all with you now; but if I‚Äôm to keep up with today‚Äôs engagements, and crowd in a talk with Lita besides‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMaisie! Will you call up Mrs.¬ÝJim?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Maisie answered from the other room: ‚ÄúThe delegation of the League For Discovering Genius is waiting downstairs, Mrs.¬ÝManford‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, to be sure! This is rather an important movement, Nona; a new thing. I do believe there‚Äôs something helpful to be done for genius. They‚Äôre just organizing their first drive: I heard of it through that wonderful Mrs.¬ÝSwoffer. You wouldn‚Äôt care to come down and see the delegation with me? No‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I sometimes think you‚Äôd be happier if you interested yourself a little more in other people‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ in all the big humanitarian movements that make one so proud to be an American. Don‚Äôt you think it‚Äôs glorious to belong to the only country where everybody is absolutely free, and yet we‚Äôre all made to do exactly what is best for us? I say that somewhere in my speech‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well, I promise to have my talk with Lita before dinner; whatever happens, I‚Äôll squeeze her in. And you and Jim needn‚Äôt be afraid of my saying anything to set her against us. Your father has impressed that on me already. After all, I‚Äôve always preached the respect of every one‚Äôs personality; only Lita must begin by respecting Jim‚Äôs.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Fresh from a stimulating encounter with Mrs.¬ÝSwoffer and the encouragers of genius, Pauline was able to face with a smiling composure her meeting with her daughter-in-law. Every contact with the humanitarian movements distinguishing her native country from the selfish <i>laissez faire</i> and cynical indifference of Europe filled her with a new optimism, and shed a reassuring light on all her private cares. America really seemed to have an immediate answer for everything, from the treatment of the mentally deficient to the elucidation of the profoundest religious mysteries. In such an atmosphere of universal simplification, how could one‚Äôs personal problems not be solved? ‚ÄúThe great thing is to believe that they <i>will</i> be,‚Äù as Mrs.¬ÝSwoffer said, √Ý propos of the finding of funds for the new League For Discovering Genius. The remark was so stimulating to Pauline that she immediately drew a large cheque, and accepted the chairmanship of the committee; and it was on the favouring breeze of the League‚Äôs applause that she sailed, at the tea-hour, into Lita‚Äôs boudoir.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt seems simpler just to ask her for a cup of tea‚ÅÝ‚Äîas if I were dropping in to see the baby,‚Äù Pauline had reflected; and as Lita was not yet at home, there was time to turn her pretext into a reality. Upstairs, in the blue and silver nursery, her sharp eye detected many small negligences under the artistic surface: soiled towels lying about, a half-empty glass of milk with a drowned fly in it, dead and decaying flowers in the √¶sthetic flowerpots, and not a single ventilator open in the upper window-panes. She made a mental note of these items, but resolved not to touch on them in her talk with Lita. At Cedarledge, where the nurse would be under her own eye, nursery hygiene could be more tactfully imparted‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>The black boudoir was still empty when Pauline returned to it, but she was armed with patience, and sat down to wait. The armchairs were much too low to be comfortable and she hated the semi-obscurity of the veiled lamps. How could one possibly occupy one‚Äôs time in a pitch-dark room with seats that one had to sprawl in as if they were deck-chairs? She thought the room so ugly and dreary that she could hardly blame Lita for wanting to do it over. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll give her a cheque for it at once,‚Äù she reflected indulgently. ‚ÄúAll young people begin by making mistakes of this kind.‚Äù She remembered with a little shiver the set of imitation tapestry armchairs that she had insisted on buying for her drawing-room when she had married Wyant. Perhaps it would be a good move to greet Lita with the offer of the cheque‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>Somehow Lita‚Äôs appearance, when she at length arrived, made the idea seem less happy. Lita had a way of looking as if she didn‚Äôt much care what one did to please her; for a young woman who spent so much money she made very little effort to cajole it out of her benefactors. ‚ÄúHullo,‚Äù she said; ‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt know you were here. Am I late, I wonder?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline greeted her with a light kiss. ‚ÄúHow can you ever tell if you are? I don‚Äôt believe there‚Äôs a clock in the house.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYes, there is; in the nursery,‚Äù said Lita.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, my dear, that one‚Äôs stopped,‚Äù rejoined her mother-in-law, smiling.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôve been seeing the boy? Oh, then you haven‚Äôt missed me,‚Äù Lita smiled back as she loosened her furs and tossed off her hat. She ran her hands through her goldfish-coloured hair, and flung herself down on a pile of cushions. ‚ÄúTea‚Äôs coming sooner or later, I suppose. Unless‚ÅÝ‚Äîa cocktail? No? Wouldn‚Äôt you be more comfortable on the floor?‚Äù she suggested to her mother-in-law.</p>
				<p>Every whalebone in Pauline‚Äôs perfectly fitting elastic girdle contracted apprehensively. ‚ÄúThank you; I‚Äôm very well here.‚Äù She assumed as willowy an attitude as the treacherous seat permitted, and added: ‚ÄúI‚Äôm so glad to have the chance of a little talk. In this rushing life we all tend to lose sight of each other, don‚Äôt we? But I hear about you so constantly from Nona that I feel we‚Äôre very close even when we don‚Äôt meet. Nona‚Äôs devoted to you‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe all are.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs awfully sweet of you,‚Äù said Lita with her air of radiant indifference.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, my dear, we hope you reciprocate,‚Äù Pauline sparkled, stretching a maternal hand to the young shoulder at her knee.</p>
				<p>Lita slanted her head backward with a slight laugh. Mrs.¬ÝManford had never thought her pretty, but today the mere freshness of her parted lips, their rosy lining, the unspoilt curves of her cheek and long white throat, stung the older woman to reluctant admiration.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAm I expected to be devoted to you <i>all</i>?‚Äù Lita questioned.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNo, dear; only to Jim.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù said Jim‚Äôs wife, her smile contracting to a faint grimace.</p>
				<p>Pauline leaned forward earnestly. ‚ÄúI won‚Äôt pretend not to know something of what‚Äôs been happening. I came here today to talk things over with you, quietly and affectionately‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike an older sister. Try not to think of me as a mother-in-law!‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita‚Äôs slim eyebrows went up ironically. ‚ÄúOh, I‚Äôm not afraid of mothers-in-law; they‚Äôre not as permanent as they used to be.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline took a quick breath; she caught the impertinence under the banter, but she called her famous tact to the rescue.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm glad you‚Äôre not afraid of me, because I want you to tell me perfectly frankly what it is that‚Äôs bothering you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you and Jim‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNothing is bothering me particularly; but I suppose I‚Äôm bothering Jim,‚Äù said Lita lightly.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre doing more than that, dear; you‚Äôre making him desperately unhappy. This talk of wanting to separate‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita rose on her elbow among the cushions, and levelled her eyes on Mrs.¬ÝManford. They looked as clear and shallow as the most expensive topazes.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúSeparations are idiotic. What I want is a hundred per cent New York divorce. And he could let me have it just as easily‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúLita! You don‚Äôt know how wretched it makes me to hear you say such things.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDoes it? Sorry! But it‚Äôs Jim‚Äôs own fault. Heaps of other girls would jump at him if he was free. And if I‚Äôm bored, what‚Äôs the use of trying to keep me? What on earth can we do about it, either of us? You can‚Äôt take out an insurance against boredom.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut why should you be bored? With everything on earth‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Pauline waved a hand at the circumjacent luxuries.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell; that‚Äôs it, I suppose. Always the same old everything!‚Äù</p>
				<p>The mother-in-law softened her voice to murmur temptingly: ‚ÄúOf course, if it‚Äôs this house you‚Äôre tired of‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Nona told me something about your wanting to redecorate some of the rooms; and I can understand, for instance, that this one‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, this is the only one I don‚Äôt utterly loathe. But I‚Äôm not divorcing Jim on account of the house,‚Äù Lita answered, with a faint smile which seemed perverse to Pauline.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThen what is the reason? I don‚Äôt understand.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not much good at reasons. I want a new deal, that‚Äôs all.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline struggled against her rising indignation. To sit and hear this chit of a Cliffe girl speak of husband and home as if it were a matter of course to discard them like last year‚Äôs fashions! But she was determined not to allow her feelings to master her. ‚ÄúIf you had only yourself to think of, what should you do?‚Äù she asked.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDo? Be myself, I suppose! I can‚Äôt be, here. I‚Äôm a sort of all-round fake. I‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWe none of us want you to be that‚ÅÝ‚ÄîJim least of all. He wants you to feel perfectly free to express your personality.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúHere‚ÅÝ‚Äîin this house?‚Äù Her contemptuous gesture seemed to tumble it down like a pack of cards. ‚ÄúAnd looking at him across the dinner-table every night of my life?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline paused; then she said gently: ‚ÄúAnd can you face giving up your baby?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBaby? Why should I? You don‚Äôt suppose I‚Äôd ever give up my baby?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThen you mean to ask Jim to give up his wife and child, and to assume all the blame as well?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, dear, no. Where‚Äôs the blame? I don‚Äôt see any! All I want is a new deal,‚Äù repeated Lita doggedly.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMy dear, I‚Äôm sure you don‚Äôt know what you‚Äôre saying. Your husband has the misfortune to be passionately in love with you. The divorce you talk of so lightly would nearly kill him. Even if he doesn‚Äôt interest you any longer, he did once. Oughtn‚Äôt you to take that into account?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita seemed to ponder. Then she said: ‚ÄúBut oughtn‚Äôt he to take into account that he doesn‚Äôt interest me any longer?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline made a final effort at self-control. ‚ÄúYes, dear; if it‚Äôs really so. But if he goes away for a time‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You know he‚Äôs to have a long holiday soon, and my husband has arranged to have him go down with Mr.¬ÝWyant to the island. All I ask is that you shouldn‚Äôt decide anything till he comes back. See how you feel about him when he‚Äôs been away for two or three weeks. Perhaps you‚Äôve been too much together‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps New York has got too much on both your nerves. At any rate, do let him go off on his holiday without the heartbreak of feeling it‚Äôs good-bye‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ My husband begs you to do this. You know he loves Jim as if he were his son‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita was still leaning on her elbow. ‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîisn‚Äôt he?‚Äù she said in her cool silvery voice, with innocently widened eyes.</p>
				<p>For an instant the significance of the retort escaped Pauline. When it reached her she felt as humiliated as if she had been caught concealing a guilty secret. She opened her lips, but no sound came from them. She sat wordless, torn between the desire to box her daughter-in-law‚Äôs ears, and to rush in tears from the house.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúLita‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù she gasped‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúthis insult‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita sat up, her eyes full of a slightly humorous compunction. ‚ÄúOh, no! An insult! Why? I‚Äôve always thought it would be so wonderful to have a love-child. I supposed that was why you both worshipped Jim. And now he isn‚Äôt even that!‚Äù She shrugged her slim shoulders, and held her hands out penitently. ‚ÄúI <i>am</i> sorry to have said the wrong thing‚ÅÝ‚Äîhonestly I am! But it just shows we can never understand each other. For me the real wickedness is to go on living with a man you don‚Äôt love. And now I‚Äôve offended you by supposing you once felt in the same way yourself‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline slowly rose to her feet: she felt stiff and shrunken. ‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt offended me‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm not going to allow myself to be offended. I‚Äôd rather think we don‚Äôt understand each other, as you say. But surely it‚Äôs not too late to try. I don‚Äôt want to discuss things with you; I don‚Äôt want to nag or argue; I only want you to wait, to come with the baby to Cedarledge, and spend a few quiet weeks with us. Nona will be there, and my husband‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ there‚Äôll be no reproaches, no questions‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but we‚Äôll do our best to make you happy‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>Lita, with her funny twisted smile, moved toward her mother-in-law. ‚ÄúWhy, you‚Äôre actually crying! I don‚Äôt believe you do that often, do you?‚Äù She bent forward and put a light kiss on Pauline‚Äôs shrinking cheek. ‚ÄúAll right‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôll come to Cedarledge. I am dead-beat and fed-up, and I daresay it‚Äôll do me a lot of good to lie up for a while‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
				<p>Pauline, for a moment, made no answer: she merely laid her lips on the girl‚Äôs cheek, a little timidly, as if it had been made of something excessively thin and brittle.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWe shall all be very glad,‚Äù she said.</p>
				<p>On the doorstep, in the motor, she continued to move in the resonance of the outrageous question: ‚Äú<i>Well</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äî<i>isn‚Äôt he</i>?‚Äù The violence of her recoil left her wondering what use there was in trying to patch up a bond founded on such a notion of marriage. Would not Jim, as his wife so lightly suggested, run more chance of happiness if he could choose again? Surely there must still be some decent right-minded girls brought up in the old way‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ like Aggie Heuston, say! But Pauline‚Äôs imagination shivered away from that too‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Perhaps, after all, her own principles were really obsolete to her children. Only, what was to take their place? Human nature had not changed as fast as social usage, and if Jim‚Äôs wife left him nothing could prevent his suffering in the same old way.</p>
				<p>It was all very baffling and disturbing, and Pauline did not feel as sure as she usually did that the question could be disposed of by ignoring it. Still, on the drive home her thoughts cleared as she reflected that she had gained her main point‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor the time, at any rate. Manford had enjoined her not to estrange or frighten Lita, and the two women had parted with a kiss. Manford had insisted that Lita should be induced to take no final decision till after her stay at Cedarledge; and to this also she had acquiesced. Pauline, on looking back, began to be struck by the promptness of Lita‚Äôs surrender, and correspondingly impressed by her own skill in man≈ìuvring. There <i>was</i> something, after all, in these exercises of the will, these smiling resolves to ignore or dominate whatever was obstructive or unpleasant! She had gained with an almost startling ease the point which Jim and Manford and Nona had vainly struggled for. And perhaps Lita‚Äôs horrid insinuation had not been a voluntary impertinence, but merely the unconscious avowal of new standards. The young people nowadays, for all their long words and scientific realism, were really more like children than ever‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>In Pauline‚Äôs boudoir, Nona, curled up on the hearth, her chin in her hands, raised her head at her mother‚Äôs approach. To Pauline the knowledge that she was awaited, and that she brought with her the secret of defeat or victory, gave back the healing sense of authority.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all right, darling,‚Äù she announced; ‚Äújust a little summer shower; I always told you there was nothing to worry about.‚Äù And she added with a smile: ‚ÄúYou see, Nona, some people <i>do</i> still listen when your old mother talks to them.‚Äù</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
