<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap24"></a>XXIV</h2>


<p>
THE Marchesa di San Fedele's ideas about the country were perfectly
simple; in fact she had only one. She regarded it as a place in which
there was more time to play bridge than in town. Thank God for
that!—and the rest one simply bore with... Of course there was the
obligatory going the rounds with host or hostess: gardens, glass, dairy,
chicken-hatchery, and heaven knew what besides (stables, thank goodness,
were out of fashion—even if people rode they no longer, unless they
kept hounds, dragged one between those dreary rows of box stalls, or
made one admire the lustrous steel and leather of the harness room, or
the monograms stencilled in blue and red on the coach-house floor).
</p>
<p>
The Marchesa's life had always been made up of doing things as dull as
going over model dairies in order to get the chance, or the money, to do
others as thrilling to her as dancing was to Lita. It was part of the
game: one had to pay for what one got: the thing was to try and get a
great deal more than the strict equivalent.
</p>
<p>
"Not that I don't marvel at your results, Pauline; we all do. But
they make me feel so useless and incapable. All this wonderful
creation—baths and swimming-pools and hatcheries and fire-engines,
and everything so perfect, indoors and out! Sometimes I'm glad you've never
been to our poor old San Fedele. But of course bathrooms will have to be
put in at San Fedele if Michelangelo finds an American bride when he
comes over..."
</p>
<p>
Pauline laid down the pen she had taken up to record the exact terms in
which she was to address the Cardinal's secretary. ("A <i>personal</i>
note, dear; yes, in your own writing; they don't yet understand your new
American ways at the Vatican...")
</p>
<p>
"When Michelangelo comes over?" Pauline echoed.
</p>
<p>
The Marchesa's face was sharper than a knife. "It's my little surprise.
I didn't mean you or Dexter to know till the contract was signed..."
</p>
<p>
"What contract?"
</p>
<p>
"My boy's to do Cæsar Borgia in the new film. Klawhammer cabled a
definite offer the day you left for the country. And of course I
insisted on Michelangelo's sailing instantly, though he'd planned to
spend the spring in Paris and was rather cross at having to give it up.
But as I told him, now is the moment to secure a lovely American bride.
We all know what your rich papas-in-law over here always ask: 'What
debts? What prospects? What other women?' The woman matter can generally
be arranged. The debts <i>are</i>, in this case—thanks to your
generosity. But the prospects—what were <i>they</i>, I ask you?
Months of green mould at San Fedele for a fortnight's splash in Rome ...
oh, I don't disguise it! And what American bride would accept
<i>that</i>? The San Fedele pearls, yes—but where is the San
Fedele plumbing? But now, my dear, Michelangelo presents himself as an
equal ... superior, I might say, if I weren't afraid of being partial.
Cæsar Borgia in a Klawhammer film—no one knows how many millions
it may mean! And of course Michelangelo is the very type..."
</p>
<p>
"<i>To do me the favour to transmit to his Eminence</i>... Yes; this really
is a surprise, Amalasuntha." Inwardly Pauline was saying: "After all,
why not? If his own mother doesn't mind seeing him all over the place on
film posters. And perhaps now he may pay us back—in common decency
he'll have to!"
</p>
<p>
She saw no serious reason for displeasure, once she had dropped her
carefully cultivated Wyant attitude. "If only it doesn't upset Lita
again, and make her restless!" But they really couldn't hope to keep all
Lita's friends and relations off the screen.
</p>
<p>
"Arthur was amazed—and awfully pleased, after the first recoil. Dear
Arthur, you know, always recoils at first," the Marchesa continued, with
her shrewd deprecating smile, which insinuated that Pauline of course
wouldn't. (It was odd, Pauline reflected; the Marchesa always looked
like a peasant when she was talking business.)
</p>
<p>
"Arthur? You've already written to him about it?"
</p>
<p>
"No, dear. I ran across him yesterday in town. You didn't know Arthur'd
come back? I thought he said he'd telephoned to Nona, or somebody. A
touch of gout—got fidgety because he couldn't see his doctor. But
he looked remarkably well, I thought—so handsome still, in his
<i>élancé</i> Wyant way; only a little too flushed, perhaps. Yes ...
poor Eleanor... Oh, no; he said Jim was still on the island. Perfectly
contented fishing. Jim's the only person I know who's always perfectly
contented ... such a lesson..." The Marchesa's sigh seemed to add: "Very
restful—but how I should despise him if he were my Michelangelo!"
</p>
<p>
Pauline could hear—oh, how distinctly!—all that her former
husband would have to say about Michelangelo's projects. They would be
food for an afternoon's irony. But that did not greatly trouble
her—nor did Wyant's unexpected return. He was always miserable out
of reach of his doctor. And the fact that Jim hadn't come back proved
that there was nothing seriously wrong. Pauline thought: "I'll write to
Jim again, and tell him how perfect Dexter has been about Lita and the
baby, and that will convince him there's no need to hurry back."
</p>
<p>
Complacency returned to her. How should it not, with the list for the
Cardinal's reception nearly complete, and the telephonic assurance of
the Bishop of New York and the Chief Rabbi that both these dignitaries
would be present? Socially also, though the season was over, the
occasion promised to be brilliant. Lots of people were coming back just
to see how a Cardinal was received. Even the Rivingtons were
coming—she had it from the Bishop. Yes, the Rivingtons had
certainly been more cordial since she and Manford had thrown them over
at the last minute. That was the way to treat people who thought
themselves so awfully superior. What wouldn't the Rivingtons have given
to capture the Cardinal? But he was sailing for Italy the day after
Pauline's reception—that was the beauty of it! No one else could
possibly have him. Amalasuntha had stage-managed the whole business very
cleverly. She had even overcome the Cardinal's scruples when he heard
that Mrs. Manford was chairman of the Birth Control committee... And
tonight, at the dinner, how pleasant everybody's congratulations would
be! Pauline gloried in her achievement for Manford's sake. Despite his
assurance to the contrary she could never imagine, for more than a
moment at a time, that such successes were really indifferent to him.
</p>



<p>
Lita appeared in the drawing-room after almost everybody had arrived.
She was always among the last; and in the country, as she said, there
was no way of knowing what time it was. Even at Cedarledge, where all
the clocks agreed to a second, one could never believe them, and always
suspected they must have stopped together, twelve hours before.
</p>
<p>
"Besides, what's the use of knowing what time it is in the country? Time
for <i>what</i>?"
</p>
<p>
She came in quietly, almost unnoticeably, with the feathered gait that
was half-way between drifting and floating; and at once, in spite of the
twenty people assembled, had the shining parquet and all the mirrors to
herself. That was her way: that knack of clearing the floor no matter
how quietly she entered. And tonight—!
</p>
<p>
Well; perhaps, Manford thought, all the other women <i>were</i> a little
overdressed. Women always had a tendency to overdress when they dined
with the Manfords; to wear too many jewels, and put on clothes that
glistened. Even at Cedarledge Pauline's parties had a New York
atmosphere. And Lita, in her straight white slip, slim and unadorned as
a Primitive angel, with that close coif of goldfish-coloured hair, and
not a spangle, a jewel, a pearl even, made the other women's clothes
look like upholstery.
</p>
<p>
Manford, by the hearth, slightly bored in anticipation, yet bound to
admit that, like all his wife's shows, it was effectively
done—Manford received the shock of that quiet entrance, that
shimmer widening into light, and then turned to Mrs. Herman Toy. Full
noon there; the usual Rubensy redundance flushed by golfing in a high
wind, by a last cocktail before dressing, by the hurried wriggle into
one of those elastic sheaths the women—the redundant
women—wore. Well; he liked ripeness in a fruit to be eaten as soon
as plucked. And Gladys' corn-yellow hair was almost as springy and full
of coloured shadows as the other's red. But the voice, the dress, the
jewels, the blatant jewels! A Cartier show-case spilt over a strawberry
mousse... And the quick possessive look, so clumsily done—brazen,
yet half-abashed! When a woman's first business was to make up her mind
which it was to be... Chances were the man didn't care, as long as her
ogling didn't make him ridiculous... Why couldn't some women always be
in golf clothes—if any? Gala get-up wasn't in everybody's line...
There was Lita speaking to Gladys now—with auburn eyebrows lifted
just a thread. The contrast—! And Gladys purpler and more
self-conscious—God, why did she have her clothes so tight? And
that drawing-room drawl! Why couldn't she just sing out: "Hul<i>lo</i>!"
as she did in the open?
</p>
<p>
The Marchesa—how many times more was he to hear Pauline say:
"Amalasuntha on your right, dear." Oh, to get away to a world where
nobody gave dinners, and there were no Marchesas on one's right! He knew
by heart the very look of the little cheese soufflés, light as cherubs'
feathers, that were being handed around before the soup on silver-gilt
dishes with coats-of-arms. Everything at Cedarledge was silver-gilt.
Pauline, as usual, had managed to transplant the party to New York, when
all he wanted was to be quiet, smoke his pipe, and ride or tramp with
Nona and Lita. Why couldn't she see it? Her vigilant eye sought
his—was it for approval or admonition? What was she saying? "The
Cardinal? Oh, yes. It's all settled. So sweet of him! Of course you must
all promise to come. But I've got another little surprise for you after
dinner. No; not a word beforehand; not if you were to put me on the
rack." What on earth did she mean?
</p>
<p>
"A surprise? Is this a surprise party?" It was Amalasuntha now. "Then I
must produce mine. But I daresay Pauline's told you. About Michelangelo
and Klawhammer... Cæsar Borgia ... such a sum that I don't dare to
mention it—you'd think I was mixing up the figures. But I've got them
down in black and white. Of course, as the producers say, Michelangelo's
so supremely the type—it's more than they ever could have hoped for."
What was the woman raving about? "He sails tomorrow," she said. Sailing
again—was that damned Michelangelo always sailing? Hadn't his debts
been paid on the express condition—? But no; there's been nothing, as
the Marchesa called it, "in black and white." The transaction had been
based on the implicit understanding that nothing but dire necessity
would induce Michelangelo to waste his charms on New York. Dire
necessity—or the chance to put himself permanently beyond it! A
fortune from a Klawhammer film. As Amalasuntha said, it was incalculable...
</p>
<p>
"It's the type, you see: between ourselves, there's always been a rumour
of Borgia blood on the San Fedele side. A naughty ancestress! Perhaps
you've noticed the likeness? You remember that wonderful profile
portrait of Cæsar Borgia in black velvet? What gallery is it in? Oh, I
know—it came out in 'Vogue'!" Amalasuntha visibly bridled at her
proficiency. She was aware that envious people said the Italians knew
nothing of their own artistic inheritance. "I remember being so struck by
it at the time—I said to Venturino: 'But it's the image of our boy!'
Though Michelangelo will have to grow a beard, which makes him furious...
But then the millions!"
</p>
<p>
Manford, looking up, caught a double gaze bent in his direction. Gladys
Toy's vast blue eyes had always been like searchlights; but tonight they
seemed actually to be writing her private history over his head, like an
advertising aeroplane. The fool! But was the other look also meant for
him? That half-shaded glint of Lita's—was it not rather attached to
the Marchesa, strung like a telephone wire to her lips? Klawhammer ...
Michelangelo ... a Borgia film... Those listening eyes missed not a
syllable...
</p>
<p>
"The offers those fellows make—right and left—nobody takes much
account of them. Wait till I see your contract, as you call it... If
you really think it's a job for a gentleman," Manford growled.
</p>
<p>
"But, my friend, gentlemen can't be choosers! Who are the real
working-class today? Our old aristocracies, alas! And besides, is it
ever degrading to create a work of art? I thought in America you made so
much of creativeness—constructiveness—what do you call it? Is
it less creative to turn a film than to manufacture bathtubs? Can there be
a nobler mission than to teach history to the millions by means of
beautiful pictures? ... Yes! I see Lita listening, and I know she
agrees with me... Lita! What a Lucrezia for his Cæsar! But why look
shocked, dear Dexter? Of course you know that Lucrezia Borgia has been
entirely rehabilitated? I saw that also in 'Vogue.' She was a perfectly
pure woman—and her hair was exactly the colour of Lita's."
</p>



<p>
They were finishing coffee in the drawing-room, the doors standing open
into the tall library where the men always smoked—the library which
(as Stanley Heuston had once remarked) Pauline's incorruptible honesty had
actually caused her to fill with books.
</p>
<p>
"Oh, what is it? Not a fire? ... A chimney in the house? ... But
it's actually here... Not a ..."
</p>
<p>
The women, a-flutter at the sudden siren-shriek, the hooting, rushing
and clattering up the drive, surged across the parquet, flowed with
startled little cries out into the hall, and saw the unsurprisable
Powder signalling to two perfectly matched footmen to throw open the
double doors.
</p>
<p>
"A fire? The engine ... the ... oh, it's a <i>fire-drill</i>! ... A
<i>parade</i>! How realistic! How lovely of you! What a beauty the engine
is!"
</p>
<p>
Pauline stood smiling, watch in hand, as the hook-and-ladder motor
clattered up the drive and ranged itself behind the engine. The big
lantern over the front door illuminated fresh scarlet paint and
super-polished brasses, the firemen's agitated helmets and perspiring
faces, the flashing hoods of the lamps.
</p>
<p>
"Just five minutes to the second! Wonderful!" She was shaking hands with
each member of the amateur brigade in turn. "I can't tell you how I
congratulate you—every one of you! Such an achievement ... you really
manœuvre like professionals. No one would have believed it was the
first time! Dexter, will you tell them a hot supper has been prepared
downstairs!" To the guests she was explaining in a triumphant undertone:
"I wanted to give them the chance to show off their new toy ... Yes, I
believe it's absolutely the most perfected thing in fire-engines. Dexter
and I thought it was time the village was properly equipped. It's really
more on account of the farmers—such a sense of safety for the
neighbourhood... Oh, Mr. Motts, I think you're simply wonderful, all
of you. Mr. Manford and my daughter are going to show you the way to
supper... Yes, yes, you <i>must</i>! Just a sandwich and something hot."
</p>
<p>
She dominated them all, grave and glittering as a goddess of Velocity.
"She enjoys it as much as other women do love-making," Manford muttered
to himself.
</p>


</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
