<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap21"></a>XXI</h2>


<p>
THE last day before her husband's arrival had been exhausting to
Pauline; but she could not deny that the results were worth the effort.
When had she ever before heard Dexter say on such a full note of
satisfaction: "Jove, but it's good to be back! What have you done to
make the place look so jolly?", or seen his smiling glance travel so
observantly about the big hall with its lamps and flowers and blazing
hearth? "Well, Lita, this is better than town, eh? You didn't know what
a good place Cedarledge could be! Don't rush off upstairs—they're
bringing the baby down. Come over to the fire and warm up; it's nipping
here in the hills. Hullo, Nona, you quiet mouse—didn't even see you,
curled up there in your corner..."
</p>
<p>
Yes; the arrival had been perfect. Even Lita's kiss had seemed
spontaneous. And Dexter had praised everything, noticed all the
improvements; had voluntarily announced that he meant to inspect the new
heating system and the model chicken hatchery the next morning.
"Wonderful, what a way you have of making things a hundred per cent
better when they seemed all right before! I suppose even the eggs at
breakfast tomorrow will be twice their normal size."
</p>
<p>
One such comment paid his wife for all she had done, and roused her
inventive faculty to fresh endeavour. Wasn't there something else she
could devise to provoke his praise? And the beauty of it was that it all
looked as if it had been done so easily. The casual observer would never
have suspected that the simple life at Cedarledge gave its smiling
organizer more trouble than a season of New York balls.
</p>
<p>
That also was part of Pauline's satisfaction. She even succeeded in
persuading herself, as she passed through the hall with its piled-up
golf clubs and tennis rackets, its motor coats and capes and scarves
stacked on the long table, and the muddy terriers comfortably rolled up
on chintz-cushioned settles, that it was really all as primitive and
impromptu as it looked, and that she herself had always shared her
husband's passion for stamping about in the mud in tweed and homespun.
</p>
<p>
"One of these days," she thought, "we'll give up New York altogether,
and live here all the year round, like an old-fashioned couple, and
Dexter can farm while I run the poultry-yard and dairy." Instantly her
practical imagination outlined the plan of an up-to-date chicken-farm on
a big scale, and calculated the revenues to be drawn from really
scientific methods of cheese and butter-making. Spring broilers, she
knew, were in ever-increasing demand, and there was a great call in
restaurants and hotels for the little foreign-looking cream-cheeses in
silver paper...
</p>

<p><br></p>

<p>
"The Marchesa has rung up again, madam," Powder reminded her, the second
morning at breakfast. Everybody came down to breakfast at Cedarledge; it
was part of the simple life. But it generally ended in Pauline's
throning alone behind the tea-urn, for her husband and daughter revelled
in unpunctuality when they were on a holiday, and Lita's inability to
appear before luncheon was tacitly taken for granted.
</p>
<p>
"The Marchesa?" Pauline was roused from the placid enjoyment of her
new-laid egg and dewy butter. Why was it that one could never completely
protect one's self against bores and bothers? They had done everything
they could for Amalasuntha, and were now discovering that gratitude may
take more troublesome forms than neglect.
</p>
<p>
"The Marchesa would like to consult you about the date of the Cardinal's
reception."
</p>
<p>
Ah, then it was a fact—it was really settled! A glow of satisfaction
swept away Pauline's indifference, and her sense of fairness obliged her
to admit that, for such a service, Amalasuntha had a right to a Sunday
at Cedarledge. "It will bore her to death to spend two days here alone
with the family; but she will like to be invited, and in the course of
time she'll imagine it was a big house-party," Pauline reflected.
</p>
<p>
"Very well, Powder. Please telephone that I shall expect the Marchesa
next Saturday."
</p>
<p>
That gave them, at any rate, the inside of a week to themselves. After
six days alone with his women-kind perhaps even Dexter would not be
sorry for a little society; and if so, Pauline, with the Marchesa as a
bait, could easily drum up a country-neighbour dinner. The Toys, she
happened to remember, were to be at the Greystock Country Club over
Easter. She smiled at the thought that this might have made Dexter
decide to give up California for Cedarledge. She was not afraid of Mrs.
Toy any longer, and even recognized that her presence in the
neighbourhood might be useful. Pauline could never wholly believe—at
least not for many hours together—that people could be happy in the
country without all sorts of social alleviations; and six days of quiet
seemed to her measurable only in terms of prehistoric eras. When had her
mind ever had such a perspective to range over? Knowing it could be
shortened at will she sighed contentedly, and decided to devote the
morning to the study of a new refrigerating system she had recently seen
advertised.
</p>
<p>
Dexter had not yet made his tour of inspection with her; but that was
hardly surprising. The first morning he had slept late, and lounged
about on the terrace in the balmy sunshine. In the afternoon they had
all motored to Greystock for a round of golf; and today, on coming down
to breakfast, Pauline had learned with surprise that her husband, Nona
and Lita were already off for an early canter, leaving word that they
would breakfast on the road. She did not know whether to marvel most at
Lita's having been coaxed out of bed before breakfast, or at Dexter's
taking to the saddle after so many years. Certainly the Cedarledge air
was wonderfully bracing and rejuvenating; she herself was feeling its
effects. And though she would have liked to show her husband all the
improvements she felt no impatience, but only a quiet satisfaction in
the success of her plans. If they could give Jim back a contented Lita
the object of their holiday would be attained; and in a glow of optimism
she sat down at her writing-table and dashed off a joyful letter to her
son.
</p>
<p>
"Dexter is wonderful; he has already coaxed Lita out for a ride before
breakfast... Isn't that a triumph? When you get back you won't know
her... I shouldn't have a worry left if I didn't think Nona is looking
too pale and drawn. I shall persuade her to take a course of
Inspirational treatment as soon as we get back to town. By the way," her
pen ran on, "have you heard the news about Stan Heuston? People say he's
gone to Europe with that dreadful Merrick woman, and that now Aggie will
really have to divorce him... Nona, who has always been such a friend
of Stan's, has of course heard the report, but doesn't seem to know any
more than the rest of us..."
</p>
<p>
Nothing amused Arthur Wyant more than to be supplied with such tit-bits
of scandal before they became common property. Pauline couldn't help
feeling that father and son must find the evenings long in their island
bungalow; and in the overflow of her own satisfaction she wanted to do
what she could to cheer them.
</p>

<p><br></p>

<p>
In spite of her manifold occupations the day seemed long. She had
visited the baby, seen the cook, consulted with Powder about the working
of the new burglar-alarm, gone over the gardens, catalogues in hand,
with the head-gardener, walked down to the dairy and the poultry yard to
say that Mr. Manford would certainly inspect them both the next day, and
called up Maisie Bruss to ask news of her mother, and tell her to
prepare a careful list for the reception to the Cardinal; yet an
astonishing amount of time still remained. It was delightful to be in
the country, to study the working-out of her improvements, and do her
daily exercises with windows open on the fresh hill breezes; but already
her real self was projected forward into complicated plans for the
Cardinal's entertainment. She wondered if it would not be wise to run up
to town the next morning and consult Amalasuntha; and reluctantly
decided that a talk on the telephone would do.
</p>
<p>
The talk was long, and on the whole satisfactory; but if Maisie had been
within reach the arrangements for the party would have made more
progress. It was most unlucky that the doctors thought Maisie ought to
stay with her mother till the latter could get a private room at the
hospital. ("A room, of course, Maisie dear; I won't have her in a ward.
Not for the world! Just put it down on your account, please. So glad to
do it!") She really was glad to do all she could; but it was unfortunate
(and no one would feel it more than Maisie) that Mrs. Bruss should have
been taken ill just then. To fill the time, Pauline decided to go for a
walk with the dogs.
</p>
<p>
When she returned she found Nona, still in her riding-habit, settled in
a sofa-corner in the library, and deep in a book.
</p>
<p>
"Why, child, where did you drop from? I didn't know you were back."
</p>
<p>
"The others are not. Lita suddenly took it into her head that it would
be fun to motor over to Greenwich and dine at the Country Club, and so
father got a motor at Greystock and telephoned for one of the grooms to
fetch the horses. It sounded rather jolly, but I was tired, so I came
home. It's nearly full moon, and they'll have a glorious run back." Nona
smiled up at her mother, as if to say that the moon made all the
difference.
</p>
<p>
"Oh, but that means dancing, and getting home at all hours! And I
promised Jim to see that Lita kept quiet, and went to bed early. What's
the use of our having persuaded her to come here? Your father ought to
have refused to go."
</p>
<p>
"If he had, there were plenty of people lunching at Greystock who would
have taken her on. You know—the cocktail crowd. That's why father
sacrificed himself."
</p>
<p>
Pauline reflected. "I see. Your father always has to sacrifice himself.
I suppose there's no use trying to make Lita listen to reason."
</p>
<p>
"Not unless one humours her a little. Father sees that. We mustn't let
her get bored here—she won't stay if we do."
</p>
<p>
Pauline felt a sudden weariness in all her bones. It was as if the
laboriously built-up edifice of the simple life at Cedarledge had
already crumbled into dust at a kick of Lita's little foot. The
engine-house, the poultry yard, the new burglar-alarm and the heating of
the swimming pool—when would Dexter ever have time to inspect and
admire them, if he was to waste his precious holiday in scouring the
country after Lita?
</p>
<p>
"Then I suppose you and I dine alone," Pauline said, turning a pinched
little smile on her daughter.
</p>

<p><br><br><br></p>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
